一	In Chinese characters、 the number one is laid on its side、 unlike the Roman numeral i which stands upright。 As you would expect、 it is written from left to right。 ［1］ 一  As a primitive element、 the key－word meaning is discarded、 since it is too abstract to be of much help。 Instead、 the single horizontal stroke takes on the meaning of floor or ceiling、 depending on its position： if it stands above another primitive、 it means ceiling； if below、 。 
二	Like the Roman numeral ii、 which reduplicates the numeral i、 the kanji for two is a simple reduplication of the horizontal stroke that means one。 The order of writing goes from above to below、 with the first stroke slightly shorter。 ［2］ 丁 七 
三	And like the Roman numeral iii、 which triples the numeral i、 the kanji for three simply triples the single horizontal stroke。 In writing it、 think of “1 ＋ 2 ＝ 3” （一 ＋ 二 ＝ 三 ） in order to keep the middle stroke shorter。 ［3］ 万 丈 三 
四	This kanji is composed of two primitive elements、 mouth 口 and human legs 乳、 both of which we will meet in the coming lessons。 Assuming that you already knew how to write this kanji、 we will pass over the “story” connected with it until later。 Note how the second stroke is written left －to－right and then top－to－bottom。 This is consistent with what we have already seen in the first three numbers and leads us to a general principle that will be helpful when we come to more complicated kanji later on： write north－to－south、 west－to－east、 northwest－tosoutheast。 ［5］ 上 下 不 与 丐 
五	As with four、 we shall postpone learning the primitive elements that make up this character。 Note how the general principle we just learned in the preceding frame applies to the writing of the character for five。 ［4］ 丑 且 丕 世 
六	The primitives here are top hat and animal legs。 Once again、 we glide over them until later。 ［4］ 丗 丘 丙 丞 
七	Note that the first stroke “cuts” through the second。 This distinguishes seven from the character for spoon 匕 （frame 444）、 in which the horizontal stroke stops short。 ［2］ 両 並  As a primitive、 this form takes on the meaning of diced、 i。e。、 “cut” into little pieces、 consistent both with the way the character is written and with its association with the kanji for cut 切 to be learned in a later lesson （frame 85）。 
八	Just as the Arabic numeral “8” is composed of a small circle followed by a larger one、 so the kanji for eight is composed of a short line followed by a longer line、 slanting towards it but not touching it。 And just as the “lazy 8” ∞ is the mathematical symbol for “infinity、” so the expanse opened up below these two strokes is associated by the Japanese with the sense of an infi － nite expanse or something “all－encompassing。” ［2］ 丨 个 
九	If you take care to remember the stroke order of this kanji、 you will not have trouble later keeping it distinct from the kanji for power 力 （frame 858）。 ［2］ 中 丱  As a primitive、 we shall use this kanji to mean baseball team or simply baseball。 The meaning、 of course、 is derived from the nine players who make up a team。 
十	Turn this character 45º either way and you have the x used for the Roman numeral ten。 ［2］ 串 丶  As a primitive、 this character sometimes keeps its meaning of ten and sometimes signifies needle、 this latter derived from the kanji for needle 針 （frame 274）。 Since the primitive is used in the kanji itself、 there is no need to worry about confusing the two。 In fact、 we shall be following this procedure regularly。 
口	Like several of the first characters we shall learn、 the kanji for mouth is a clear pictograph。 Since there are no circular shapes in the kanji、 the square must be used to depict the circle。 ［3］ 丸 丹 主  As a primitive、 this form also means mouth。 Any of the range of possible images that the word suggests—an opening or entrance to a cave、 a river、 a bottle、 or even the largest hole in your head—can be used for the primitive meaning。 
日	This kanji is intended to be a pictograph of the sun。 Recalling what we said in the previous frame about round forms、 it is easy to detect the circle and the big smile that characterize our simplest drawings of the sun—like those yellow badges with the words、 “Have a nice day！” ［4］ 丼 丿 乂 乃  Used as a primitive、 this kanji can mean sun or day or a tongue wagging in the mouth。 This latter meaning、 incidentally、 derives from an old character outside the standard list meaning something like “sayeth” and written almost exactly the same、 except that the stroke in the middle does not touch the right side （曰、 frame 578）。 
月	This character is actually a picture of the moon、 with the two horizontal lines representing the left eye and mouth of the mythical “man in the moon。” （Actually、 the Japanese see a hare in the moon、 but it is a little farfetched to find one in the kanji。） And one month、 of course、 is one cycle of the moon。 ［4］ 久 之 乍 乎  As a primitive element、 this character can take on the sense of moon、 flesh、 or part of the body。 The reasons for the latter two meanings will be explained in a later chapter。 
田	Another pictograph、 this kanji looks like a bird’s－eye view of a rice field divided into four plots。 Be careful when writing this character to get the order of the strokes correct。 You will find that it follows perfectly the principle stated in frame 4。 ［5］ 乏 乕 乖 乗 乘  When used as a primitive element、 the meaning of rice field is most common、 but now and again it will take the meaning of brains from the fact that it looks a bit like that tangle of gray matter nestled under our skulls。 
目	Here again、 if we round out the corners of this kanji and curve the middle strokes upwards and downwards respectively、 we get something resembling an eye。 ［5］  As a primitive、 the kanji keeps its sense of eye、 or to be more specific、 an eyeball。 When placed in the surroundings of a complex kanji、 the primitive will sometimes be turned on its side like this： 罒。 
古	The primitive elements that compose this character are ten and mouth、 but you may find it easier to remember it as a pictograph of a tombstone with a cross on top。 Just think back to one of those graveyards you have visited、 or better still、 used to play in as a child、 with old inscriptions on the tombstones。 This departure from the primitive elements in favor of a picto－ graph will take place now and again at these early stages、 and almost never aft er that。 So you need not worry about cluttering up your memory with too many character “drawings。” ［5］ 亂 亅 了 予 争  Used as a primitive element、 this kanji keeps its key－word sense of old、 but care should be taken to make that abstract notion as graphic as possible。 
吾	There are a number of kanji for the word I、 but the others tend to be more specific than this one。 The key word here should be taken in the general psychological sense of the “perceiving subject。” Now the one place in our bodies that all five senses are concentrated in is the head、 which has no less than five mouths： 2 nostrils、 2 ears、 and 1 mouth。 Hence、 five mouths ＝ I。 ［7］ 亊 事 二 于 云 互 五 
冒	Remember when you were young and your mother told you never to look directly into the sun for fear you might burn out your eyes？ Probably you were foolish enough to risk a quick glance once or twice； but just as probably、 you passed that bit of folk wisdom on to someone else as you grew older。 Here、 too、 the kanji that has a sun above and an eye right below looking up at it has the meaning of risk （see frame 11）。 ［9］ 井 亘 亙 些 亡 
朋	The first companion that God made、 as the Bible story goes、 was Eve。 Upon seeing her、 Adam exclaimed、 “Flesh of my flesh！” And that is precisely what this kanji says in so many strokes。 ［8］ 亢 交 亥 亦 亭 
明	Among nature’s bright lights、 there are two that the biblical myth has God set in the sky： the sun to rule over the day and the moon to rule the night。 Each of them has come to represent one of the common connotations of this key word： the sun、 the bright insight of the clear thinker、 and the moon、 the bright intuition of the poet and the seer （see frame 13）。 ［8］ 亶 仂 
唱	This one is easy！ You have one mouth making no noise （the choirmaster） and two mouths with wagging tongues （the minimum for a chorus）。 So think of the key word、 chant、 as monastery singing and the kanji is yours forever （see frame 11）。 ［11］ 仇 从 他 
晶	What else can the word sparkle suggest if not a diamond？ And if you’ve ever held a diamond up to the light、 you will have noticed how every facet of it becomes like a miniature sun。 This kanji is a picture of a tiny sun in three places （that is、 “everywhere”）、 to give the sense of something that sparkles on all sides。 Just like a diamond。 In writing the primitive elements three times、 note again how the rule for writing given in frame  4 holds true not only for the strokes in each individual element but also for the disposition of the elements in the character as a whole。 ［12］ 仝 代 仮 
品	As in the character for sparkle、 the triplication of a single element in this character indicates “everywhere” or “heaps of。” When we think of goods in modern industrial society、 we think of what has been mass－produced—that is to say、 produced for the “masses” of open mouths waiting like fledglings in a nest to “consume” whatever comes their way。 ［9］ 件 仼 伃 
呂	This character is rather like a picture of two of the vertebrae in the spine linked by a single stroke。 ［7］ 伉 伊 伍 伎 伏 伐 休 
昌	What we mentioned in the previous two frames about 3 of something meaning “everywhere” or “heaps of” was not meant to be taken lightly。 In this kanji we see two suns、 one atop the other、 which、 if we are not careful、 is easily confused in memory with the three suns of sparkle。 Focus on the number this way： since we speak of prosperous times as sunny、 what could be more prosperous than a sky with two suns in it？ Just be sure to actually see them there。 ［8］ 伯 伸 
早	This kanji is actually a picture of the first flower of the day、 which we shall、 in defiance of botanical science、 call the sunflower、 since it begins with the element for sun and is held up on a stem with leaves （the pictographic representation of the final two strokes）。 This time、 however、 we shall ignore the pictograph and imagine sunflowers with needles for stems、 which can be plucked and used to darn your socks。 The sense of early is easily remembered if one thinks of the sunflower as the early riser in the garden、 because the sun、 showing favoritism towards its namesake、 shines on it before all the others （see frame 10）。 ［6］ 伽 佃 但  As a primitive element、 this kanji takes the meaning of sunflower、 which was used to make the abstract key word early more graphic。 
旭	This character is a sort of nickname for the Japanese flag with its well－known emblem of the rising sun。 If you can picture two seams running down that great red sun、 and then imagine it sitting on a baseball bat for a flagpole、 you have a slightly irreverent—but not altogether inaccurate—picture of how the sport has caught on in the Land of the Rising Sun。 ［6］ 佇 位 低 住 佐 佑 
世	We generally consider one generation as a period of thirty （or ten plus ten plus ten） years。 If you look at this kanji in its completed form—not in its stroke order—you will see three tens。 When writing it、 think of the lower horizontal lines as “addition” lines written under numbers to add them up。 Thus： ten “plus” ten “plus” ten ＝ thirty。 Actually、 it’s a lot easier doing it with a pencil than reading it in a book。 ［5］ 体 何 佖 佗 余 
胃	You will need to refer back to frames 13 and 14 here for the special meaning of the two primitive elements that make up this character： flesh （part of the body） and brain。 What the kanji says、 if you look at it、 is that the part of the body that keeps the brain in working order is the stomach。 To keep the elements in proper order、 when you write this kanji think of the brain as being “held up” by the flesh。 ［9］ 佞 佳 
旦	While we normally refer to the start of the day as “daybreak、” Jap anese commonly refers to it as the “opening up of night” into day。 Hence the choice of this rather odd key word、 nightbreak。 The single stroke at the bottom represents the  （have a peek again at frame 1） or the horizon over which the sun is poking its head。 ［5］ 佼 使 
胆	The pieces in this character should be easily recognizable： on the left 、 the element for part of the body、 and on the right、 the character for nightbreak、 which we have just met。 What all of this has to do with the gall bladder is not immediately clear。 But all we need to do is give a slight twist to the traditional biblical advice about not letting the sun set on your anger （which ancient medicine associated with the choler or bile that the gall bladder is supposed to filter out）、 and change it to “not letting the night break on your anger” （or your gall）—and the work of remembering the kanji is done。 And the improvement is not a bad piece of advice in its own right、 since anger、 like so many other things、 can oft en be calmed by letting the sun set on it and then “sleeping it off 。” ［9］ 侊 侒 
亘	“Sunrise、 sunset、 sunrise、 sunset…” goes the song of the Fiddler on the Roof。 You can almost see the journey of the sun as it moves from one horizon （the ） to its noonday heights in the sky overhead （ceiling） and then disappears over the other horizon—day aft er day、 marking the span of our lives。 ［6］ 侔 供 依 
凹	You couldn’t have asked for a better key word for this kanji！ Just have a look at it： a perfect image of a concave lens （remembering、 of course、 that the kanji square off rounded things）、 complete with its own little “cave。” Now all you have to do is learn how to write it。 ［5］ 侠 価 侫 侭 侮 
凸	Maybe this helps you see how the Japanese have no trouble keeping convex distinct from concave。 Note the odd feeling of the third stroke。 If it doesn’t feel all that strange now、 by the time you are done with this book、 it will。 There are very few times you will have to write it。 ［5］ 侯 侵 侶 便 係 
旧	A walking stick is needed for days of olden times、 since days、 too、 get old—at least insofar as we refer to them as the “good old days。” The main thing here is to think of “good old days” when you hear the key word olden times。 The rest will take care of itself。 ［5］ 俉 俐 
自	You can think of this kanji as a stylized pictograph of the nose、 that little drop that Mother Nature set between your eyes。 The Jap anese refer to themselves by pointing a finger at their nose— giving us an easy way to remember the kanji for oneself。 ［6］ 俑 俔 俗 俘 俚 俛  The same meaning of oneself can be kept when this kanji is used as a primitive element、 but you will generally find it better to give it the meaning of nose or nostrils、 both because it accords with the story above and because it is the first part of the kanji for nose （frame 678）。 
白	The color white is a mixture of all the primary colors、 both for pigments and for light、 as we see when a prism breaks up the rays of the sun。 Hence、 a single drop of sun spells white。 ［5］ 保 俟 信 俣 俤  As a primitive、 this character can either retain its meaning of white or take the more graphic meaning of a white bird or dove。 This latter stems from the fact that it appears at the top of the kanji for bird、 which we shall get to later （frame 1941）。 
百	The Japanese refer to a person’s 99th birthday as a “white year” because white is the kanji you are left with if you subtract one from a hundred。 ［6］ 俥 修 俯 俳 俵 俶 
中	The elements here are a walking stick and a mouth。 Remember the trouble your mother had getting medicine in your mouth？ Chances are it crossed her mind more than once to grab something handy、 like your grandfather’s walking stick、 to pry open your jaws while she performed her duty。 Keep the image of getting something in from the outside、 and the otherwise abstract sense of this key word should be a lot easier than trying to spoon castor oil into a baby’s mouth。 ［4］ 俸 俺 俾 俿 
千	This kanji is almost too simple to pull apart、 but for the sake of practice、 have a look at the drop above and the ten below。 Now put the elements together by thinking of squeezing two more zeros out of an eyedropper alongside the number ten to make it a thousand。 ［3］ 倅 倆 倉 
舌	The primitive for mouth and the character for thousand naturally form the idea of tongue if one thinks of a thousand mouths able to speak the same language、 or as we say、 “sharing a common tongue。” It is easy to see the connection between the idiom and the kanji if you take its image literally： a single tongue being passed around from mouth to mouth。 ［6］ 個 倍 倏 們 倒 倔 
升	This is the character for the little wooden box that the Japanese use for measuring things、 as well as for drinking saké out of。 Simply imagine the outside as spiked with a thousand sharp needles、 and the quaint little measuring box becomes a drinker’s nightmare！ Be very careful when you write this character not to confuse it with the writing of thousand。 The reason for the diff erence gives us a chance to clarify another general principle of writing that supersedes the one we mentioned in frame 4： when a single stroke runs vertically through the middle of a character、 it is written last。 ［4］ 倖 候 倚 倞 
昇	Our image here is made up of two primitive elements： a sun and a measuring box。 Just as the sun can be seen rising up in the morning from—where else—the Land of the Rising Sun、 this kanji has the sun rising up out of a Japanese measuring box—the “measuring box of the rising－up sun。” ［8］ 倣 倨 
丸	We speak of “round numbers、” or “rounding a number off 、” meaning to add an insignificant amount to bring it to the nearest 10。 For instance、 if you add just a wee bit、 the tiniest drop、 to nine、 you end up with a round number。 ［3］ 倩 倪 倫  As a primitive、 this element takes the meaning of a fat man。 Think of a grotesquely fat man whose paunch so covers the plate that he is always getting hit by the pitch。 Hence a round baseball player becomes a fat man。 
寸	This kanji actually stood for a small measurement used prior to the metric system、 a bit over an inch in length、 and from there acquired the sense of measurement。 In the old system、 it was one－tenth of a shaku （whose kanji we shall meet in frame  1070）。 The picture、 appropriately、 represents one drop of a ten （with a hook！）。 ［3］ 倬 倭 倶  As a primitive、 we shall use this to mean glue or glued to。 There is no need to devise a story to remember this、 since the primitive will appear so oft en you would have to struggle hard not to remember it。 
専	Ten 。 。 。 rice fields 。 。 。 glue。 That is how one would read the primitive elements of this kanji from top to bottom。 Now if we make a simple sentence out of these elements、 we get： “Ten rice fields glued together。” A specialty、 of course、 refers to one’s special “field” of endeavor or competence。 In fact、 few people remain content with a single specialty and usually extend themselves in other fields as well。 This is how we come to get the picture of ten fields glued together to represent a specialty。 ［9］ 倹 偀 偂 偃 偆 假 偈 偉 偏 
博	At the left we have the needle； at the right、 the kanji for specialty、 plus an extra drop at the top。 Think of a Dr。 who is a specialist with a needle （an acupuncturist） and let the drop at the top represent the period at the end of Dr。 In principle we are trying to avoid this kind of device、 which plays on abstract grammatical conventions； but I think you will agree、 aft er you have had occasion to use the right side of this kanji in forming other kanji、 that the exception is merited in this case。 ［12］ 嘉 嘔 嘖 嘗 嘘 嘛 嘩 嘯 嘱 嘲 嘴 嘶  The primitive form of this kanji eliminates the needle on the left and gets the meaning of an acupuncturist。 We have already seen one example of how to form primitives from other primitives、 when we formed the nightbreak out of sun and  （frame 30）。 Let us take two more examples of this procedure right away、 so that we can do so from now on without having to draw any particular attention to the fact。  divining rod 卜 This is a picture of a divining rod、 composed of a drop and a walking stick、 but easy enough to remember as a pictograph。 Alternately、 you can think of it as a magic wand。 In either case、 it should suggest images of magic or fortune－telling。 Nowadays it is written in the stroke order given here when it appears as a primitive、 but until recently the order was oft en reversed （in order to instill correct habits for more stylized calligraphy）。 ［2］ 偐 偕  Although it falls outside of the list of general－use kanji、 this element is actually a kanji in its own right、 having virtually the same meaning as the kanji in the next frame。 
占	 This is one of those kanji that is a real joy of simplicity： a divining rod with a mouth—which translate directly into fortunetelling。 Note how the movement from top to bottom （the movement in which the kanji are written） is also the order of the elements which make up our story and of the key word itself： first divining rod、 then mouth。 This will not always be possible、 but where it is、 memory has almost no work at all to do。 ［5］ 偖 做 停 健 偬 
上	The two directions、 above and below、 are usually pointed at with the finger。 But the characters do not follow that custom、 so we have to choose something else、 easily remembered。 The prim－ itives show a magic wand standing above a —“magically、” you might say。 Anyway、 go right on to the next frame、 since the two belong together and are best remembered as a unit、 just as the words above and below suggest each other。 ［3］ 偰 偲 側 
下	Here we see our famous miraculous magic wand hanging、 all on its own、 below the ceiling、 as you probably already guessed would happen。 In addition to giving us two new kanji、 the two shapes given in this and the preceding frame also serve to fix the use of the primitives for ceiling and 、 by drawing our attention successively to the line standing above and below the primitive element to which it is related。 ［3］ 偵 偶 偸 
卓	The word eminent suggests a famous or well－known person。 So all you need to do—given the primitives of a magic wand and a sunflower—is to think of the world’s most eminent magician as one who uses a sunflower for a magic wand （like a flower－child who goes around turning the world into peace and love）。 ［8］ 偽 傀 傅 傍 傑 傔 傘 備  mist 聢 Here is our second example of a primitive composed of other primitives but not itself a kanji。 At the bottom is the primitive （also a kanji） for early or sunflower。 At the top、 a needle。 Conveniently、 mist falls early in the morning、 like little needles of rain、 to assure that the sunflower blooms early as we have learned it should。 ［8］ 傚 催 傭 傲 傳 傴 債 傷 
朝	On the right we see the moon fading off into the first light of morning、 and to the left 、 the mist that falls to give nature a shower to prepare it for the coming heat。 If you can think of the moon tilting over to spill mist on your garden、 you should have no trouble remembering which of all the elements in this story are to serve as primitives for constructing the character。 ［12］ 傷 僉 
只	When we run across abstract key words like this one、 the best way to get an image it to recall some common but suggestive phrase in which the word appears。 For instance、 we can think of the expression “it’s the only one of its kind。” Then we imagine a barker at a side－show advertising some strange pac－man like creature he has inside his tent、 with only a gigantic mouth and two wee animal legs。 ［5］ 僣 僥 僧 僭 僮 
貝	To remember the primitive elements that make up this kanji、 an eye and animal legs、 you might be tempted to think of it as a pictograph of a shellfish with its ridged shell at the top and two little legs sticking out of the bottom。 But that might not help you recall later just how many ridges to put on the shell。 Better to imagine a freakish shellfish with a single、 gigantic eye roaming the beaches on its slender little legs、 scaring the wits out of the sunbathers。 ［7］ 僴 僵 價 僻 儀 儁 儂  When used as a primitive、 in addition to shells、 the meanings oyster and clam will oft en come in handy。 
貞	Now take the last primitive、 the shellfish、 and set a magic wand over it、 and you have the kanji for upright。 After all、 the clam and the oyster are incapable of walking upright。 It would take a magician with his wand to pull off such a feat—which is precisely what we have in this kanji。 ［9］ 儉 償 
員	How do we get a mouth over a shellfish to mean an employee？ Simple。 Just remember the advice new employees get about keeping their mouths shut and doing their job、 and then make that more graphic by picturing an office building full of whitecollar workers scurrying around with clams pinched to their mouths。 ［10］ 儲 允 
見	The elements that compose the character for see are the eye firmly fixed to a pair of human legs。 Surely、 somewhere in your experience、 there is a vivid image just waiting to be dragged up to help you remember this character…。 ［7］ 元 兄 充 兆 兇 先 光 
児	The top part of the kanji in this frame、 you will remember、 is the character for olden times、 those days so old they needed a walking stick to get around。 Western mythical imagination has old “Father Time” leaning on his sickle with a newborn babe crawling around his legs、 the idea being that the circle of birthand－death goes on。 This is the first of three times that the kanji for olden times will appear in this book as a primitive element in another kanji、 so try to make the most of it。 ［7］ 兊 兎 児 兒 
元	“In the beginning…” starts that marvelous shelf of books we call the Bible。 It talks about how all things were made、 and tells us that when the Creator came to humanity she made two of them、 man and woman。 While we presume she made two of every other animal as well、 we are not told as much。 Hence we need only two and a pair of human legs come to the kanji that means beginning。 ［4］ 兔 党 兜 兢 
頁	What we have to do here is turn a shellfish into a page of a book。 The one at the top tells us that we only get a rather short book、 in fact a book of only one page。 Imagine a title printed on the shell of an oyster、 let us say “Pearl of Wisdom、” and then open the quaint book to its one and only page、 on which you find a single、 radiant drop of wisdom、 one of the masterpiece poems of nature。 ［9］ 兤 入 全 兩 兪 八 公 六 兮  As a primitive、 this kanji takes the unrelated meaning of a head （preferably one detached from its body）、 derived from the character for head （frame 1441）。 
頑	This character refers to the blockheaded、 persistent stubbornness of one who sticks to an idea or a plan just the way it was at the beginning、 without letting anything that comes up along the way alter things in the least。 The explanation makes “sense、” but is hard to remember because the word “beginning” is too abstract。 Back up to the image we used two frames ago—Adam and Eve in their Eden—and try again： The root of all stubbornness goes back to the beginning、 with two brothers each stubbornly defending his own way of life and asking their God to bless it favorably。 Abel stuck to agriculture、 Cain to animal－raising。 Picture these two with their giant、 swelled heads、 each vying for the favors of heaven、 a stubborn grimace on their faces。 No wonder something unfortunate happened！ ［13］ 具 册 
凡	While we refer to something insignificant as a “drop in the bucket、” the kanji for mediocre suggests the image of a “drop in the wind。” ［3］ 墮 墲 墳 
負	Above we have the condensed form of bound up、 and below the familiar shellfish。 Now imagine two oysters engaged in shell－toshell combat、 the one who is defeated being bound and gagged with seaweed、 the victor towering triumphantly over it。 The bound shellfish thus becomes the symbol for defeat。 ［9］ 冏 冗 
万	Japanese counts higher numbers in units of ten thousand、 unlike the West、 which advances according to units of one thousand。 （Thus、 for instance、 40、000 would be read “four ten－thousands” by a Japanese。） Given that the comma is used in larger numbers to bind up a numerical unit of one thousand、 the elements for one and bound up naturally come to form ten thousand。 The order of strokes here needs special attention、 both because it falls outside the general principles we have learned already、 and because it involves writing the element for bound up in an order opposite to the one we learned。 If it is any consolation、 this happens every time these three strokes come together。 ［3］ 写 冝 冠 
句	By combining the two primitives bound up and mouth、 it is easy to see how this character can get the meaning of a phrase。 After all、 a phrase is nothing more than a number of words bound up tightly and neatly so that they will fit in your mouth。 ［5］ 冢 冤 冥 冦 冨 
肌	Ever notice how the texture of your face and hands is aff ected by the wind？ A day’s skiing or sailing makes them rough and dry、 and in need of a good soft cream to soothe the burn。 So whenever a part of the body gets exposed to the wind、 its texture is aff ected。 （If it is any help、 the Latin word hiding inside texture connotes how something is “to the touch。”） ［6］ 冷 冾 
旬	There simply is not a good phrase in English for the block of ten days which this character represents。 So we resurrect the classical phrase、 decameron、 whose connotations the tales of Boccaccio have done much to enrich。 Actually、 it refers to a journey of ten days taken by a band of people—that is、 a group of people bound together for the days of the decameron。 ［6］ 凅 凌 
勺	If you want to bind up drops of anything—water、 soup、 lemonade—you use something to scoop these drops up、 which is what we call a ladle。 See the last drop left inside the ladle？ ［3］ 働 像 
的	 The elements white bird and ladle easily suggest the image of a bull’s eye if you imagine a rusty old ladle with a bull’s eye painted on it in the form of a tiny white bird、 who lets out a little “peep” every time you hit the target。 ［8］ 凝 処 
首	Reading this kanji from the top down、 we have： horns 。 。 。 nose。 Together they bring to mind the picture of a moose－head hanging on the den wall、 with its great horns and long nose。 Now while we would speak of cutting off a moose’s “head” to hang on the wall、 the Japanese speak of cutting off its neck。 It’s all a matter of how you look at it。 Anyway、 if you let the word neck conjure up the image of a moose with a very l－o－n－g neck hanging over the fireplace、 whose horns you use for a coat－rack and whose nose has spigots left and right for scotch and water、 you should have no trouble with the character。 Here we get a good look at what we mentioned when we first introduced the element for horns： that they can never be left floating free and require an extra horizontal stroke to prevent that from happening、 as is the case here。 ［9］ 凧 凩 凪 凬 凭 凰 凱 凵 凶 
乙	The kanji shown here actually represents the “second” position in the old Chinese zodiac、 which the Japanese still use as an alternate way of enumeration、 much the same way that English will revert to Roman numerals。 Among its many other meanings are “pure、” “tasteful、” “quaint、” and—get this！—fish guts。 Since it is a pictograph of a fishhook、 it should not be hard to associate it with the key word。 ［1］ 凸  We will keep fishhook as the primitive meaning。 Its shape will rarely be quite the same as that of the kanji。 When it appears at the bottom of another primitive、 it is straightened out、 almost as if the weight of the upper element had bent it out of shape： 肌。 And when it appears to the right of another element、 the short horizontal line that gets the shape started is omitted and it is stretched out and narrowed、 all for reasons of space and aesthetics： 肋。 Examples follow。 
乱	In a riot、 manners are laid aside and tempers get short、 even in so courtesy－conscious a land as Japan。 This kanji shows what happens to a rioting tongue： it gets “barbed” like a fishhook、 and sets to attacking the opposition、 to hook them as it were。 ［7］ 刃 刄 
直	Begin with the top two primitives、 needle and eye。 Together they represent the eye of a needle。 Below them is a fishhook that has been straightened out and its barb removed so that it can pass through the eye of the needle。 ［8］ 分 切 刈 刊 刋 刎 刑 刔 
具	Here is the full kanji on which the last frame is based。 If you can think of a table full of carpenter’s tools of all sorts、 each equipped with its own eye so that it can keep a watch over what you are doing with it、 you won’t have trouble later keeping the primitive and the kanji apart。 ［8］ 刪 刮 到 刳 
真	Here again we meet the composite element、 eye of the needle、 which here combines with tool to give us a measure of what is true and what is not。 ［10］ 制 刷 剃 削 
工	The pictograph of an I beam、 like the kind that is used in heavy construction work on buildings and bridges、 gives us the character for craft in general。 ［3］ 前 剏 剔  As a primitive element、 the key word retains the meaning of craft and also takes on the related meanings of I beam and artificial。 
左	By combining the primitive and the kanji of the last two frames and reading the results、 we get： by one’s side 。 。 。 craft。 Conveniently、 the left has traditionally been considered the “sinister” side、 where dark and occult craft s are cultivated。 Note how the second stroke droops over to the left and is longer than the first。 ［5］ 剖 剛 剞 剣 剤 
右	When thinking of the key word right、 in order to avoid confusion with the previous frame、 take advantage of the doublemeaning here、 too。 Imagine a little mouth hanging down by your side—like a little voice of conscience—telling you the right thing to do。 Here the second stroke should reach out to the right and be drawn slightly longer than the first。 ［5］ 剥 剩 剪 副 剰 
有	The picture here is of someone with a slab of meat dangling by the side、 perhaps from a belt or rope tied around the waist。 Think of it as an evil spirit in possession of one’s soul、 who can be exorcized only by allowing fresh meat to hang by one’s side until it begins to putrefy and stink so bad that the demon departs。 Take careful note of the stroke order。 ［6］ 剱 割 剳 剴 創 剽 
賄	To the left we have the primitive for a shellfish、 and to the right the kanji we just learned for possess。 Keep the connotation of the last frame for the word possess、 and now expand your image of shells to include the ancient value they had as money （a usage that will come in very helpful later on）。 Now one who is possessed by shells is likely to abandon any higher principles to acquire more and more wealth。 These are the easiest ones to bribe with a few extra shells。 ［13］ 劑 加 
貢	A tribute has a kind of double－meaning in English： honor paid freely and money collected by coercion。 Simply because a ruler bestows a noble name on a deed is hardly any consolation to the masses who must part with their hard－earned money。 Little wonder that this ancient craft of getting money by calling it a tribute has given way to a name closer to how it feels to those who pay it： a tax。 ［10］ 助 労 
項	To the right we see a head and to the left an element that means craft。 When we think of a paragraph、 we immediately think of a heading device to break a text into parts。 （Think of the elaborate heads oft en seen at the start of medieval manuscripts and the task becomes easier still。） Just where and how to do it belongs to the writer’s craft。 Hence、 we define paragraphing as the “heading craft” to remember this character。 ［12］ 劼 勒 
刀	Although this kanji no longer looks very much like a sword、 it does have some resemblance to the handle of the sword。 This is to our advantage、 in that it helps us make a distinction between two primitive elements based on this kanji。 ［2］ 動 勗 In the form of the kanji、 this primitive means a dagger。 When it appears to the right of another element、 it is commonly stretched out like this 刂 and takes the sense of a great and flashing saber、 a meaning it gets from a character we shall learn later （frame 1671）。 
刃	Think of using a dagger as a razor blade、 and it shouldn’t be hard to imagine cutting yourself。 See the little drop of blood clinging to the blade？ ［3］ 勘 務 勛 
切	To the right we see the dagger and next to it the number seven whose primitive meaning we decided would be diced （frame  7）。 It is hard to think of cutting anything with a knife without imagining one of those skillful Japanese chefs。 Only let us say that he has had too much to drink at a party、 grabs a dagger lying on the mantelpiece and starts dicing up everything in sight、 starting with the hors d’oeuvres and going on to the furniture and the carpets…。 ［4］ 勝 勞 募 勠 
召	A sword or dagger posed over a mouth is how the character for “beckoning” is written。 The related but less tame key word seduce was chosen because it seemed to fit better with the—how shall we put it？—Freudian implications of the kanji。 （Observe if you will that it is not sure whether the long slender object is seducing the small round one or vice versa。） ［5］ 勣 勲  The primitive meaning remains the same：seduce。 Just be sure to associate it with a very concrete image。 
昭	Let the key word suggest shining one’s shoes、 the purpose of which is to seduce the sun down on them for all to see。 ［9］ 勹 匁 
則	The character depicts a clam alongside a great and flashing saber。 Think of digging for clams in an area where there are gaming rules governing how large a find has to be before you can keep it。 So you take your trusty saber、 which you have carefully notched like a yardstick、 crack open a clam、 and then measure the poor little beastie to see if it is as long as the rules say it has to be。 ［9］ 匏 匕 
副	The key word vice has the sense of someone second－in－command。 The great and flashing saber to the right （its usual location、 so you need not worry about where to put it from now on） and the wealth on the left combine to create an image of dividing one’s property to give a share to one’s vice－wealthholder。 ［11］ 匿 區 十 
別	In the Old East、 the samurai and his saber were never separated。 They were constant companions、 like the cowboy of the Old West and his six－shooter。 This character depicts what must have been the height of separation－anxiety for a samurai： to be bound up with a rope and unable to get at his saber leaning only a few feet away from him。 Look at that mouth bellowing out for shame and sorrow！ Note the order in which the element for tied up is written— just as it had been with the character for ten thousand。 ［7］ 卆 升 午 半 
丁	The picture here is of a street sign on a long pole： Hollywood and Vine、 if you please、 or any street that immediately conjures up the image of a street sign to you。 ［2］ 卍 卑  Used as a primitive、 we change the meaning of the key word and take the shape to signify a nail or a spike。 Should it happen、 on reviewing、 that you find the pictographs get jumbled、 then think of jerking a street sign out of the ground and using it as a nail to repair your garage roof。 
町	Street signs standing at the corner of the rice fields depict the village limits。 （Remember what was said earlier： when used as a primitive、 a kanji may either take its primitive meaning or revert to the original meaning of its key word。） ［7］ 卒 卓 協 南 単 博 卜 
可	Remember the story about the “Little Engine that Could” when you hear this key word、 and the rest is simple。 See the determined little locomotive huffing and puffing up the mountain— ”I think I can、 I think I can。。。”—spitting railroad spikes out of its mouth as it chews up the line to the top。 ［5］ 卞 占 卦 卩 卮 
頂	The key word is actually a formal metaphor meaning “humble acceptance。” Reading off the two primitive elements in the order of their writing、 we have： nail 。 。 。 head。 As in “hitting the nail on the head。” Now one presumes that most people can handle metaphors、 but if you were to run into a dimwit working in a hardware store who only knew the literal meaning of things、 and were to ask him、 in your best Japanese、 to place on your head a nail、 he might miss the point and cause you considerable torment。 ［11］ 印 卿 
子	This kanji is a pictograph of a child wrapped up in one of those handy cocoons that Japanese mothers fix to their backs to carry around young children who cannot get around by themselves。 The first stroke is like a wee head popping out for air； the second shows the body and legs all wrapped up； and the final stroke shows the arms sticking out to cling to the mother’s neck。 ［3］ 厂 厄 厓  As a primitive、 the meaning of child is retained、 though you might imagine a little older child、 able to run around and get into more mischief。 
孔	Probably the one thing most children fear more than anything else is the dentist’s chair。 Once a child has seen a dentist holding the x－rays up to the light and heard that ominous word cavity、 even though it is not likely to know that the word means “hole” until it is much older、 it will not be long before those two syllables get associated with the drill and that row of shiny hooks the dentist uses to torture people who are too small to fight back。 ［4］ 厖 厘 厚 原 
了	Learn this character by returning to frame 95 and the image given there。 The only diff erence is that the “arms” have been left off （actually、 only tucked inside）。 Thus a child with its arms wrapped up into the back－sack is the picture of a job successfully completed。 ［2］ 厠 厥 
女	You have probably seen somewhere the form of a squatting woman drawn behind this character、 with two legs at the bottom、 two arms （the horizontal line） and the head poking out the top。 A little farfetched、 until you draw the character and feel the grace and flow of the three simple strokes。 Remembering the kanji is easy； being able to write it beautifully is another thing。 ［3］ 厦 厨 厩 The primitive meaning is the same： woman。 
好	The phrase “to be fond of someone” has a natural gentleness about it、 and lends a tenderness to the sense of touching by giv－ ing us the related term “to fondle。” The character likens it to a woman fondling her child。 ［6］ 厰 厶 
如	Pardon me if I revert to the venerable old Dr。 Freud again、 but his eye for symbolism is oft en helpful to appreciate things that more earthy imaginations once accepted more freely but that we have learned to cover over with a veneer of etiquette。 For instance、 the fact that things like the mouth of a cave served as natural ritual substitutes for the opening through which a woman gives birth。 Hence、 in order to be reborn as an adult、 one may have to pass through the psychological equivalent of the womb、 that is、 something that bears a likeness to the opening of the woman from whom you were born。 ［6］ 參 及 
母	Look closely at this kanji and you will find the outline of the kanji for woman in it、 the second stroke of which has been expanded to make space for the two breasts that make her a mama。 Likening this sound to a baby nursing at its mother’s breast has aff orded some scholars of comparative linguistics a way to explain the presence of the same word across a wide range of language－groups。 ［5］ 友 双 反 収 叔  As a primitive we shall add the meaning of breasts in accord with the explanation given above。 Take careful note of the fact that the form is altered slightly when this kanji serves as a primitive、 the final two dots joining together to form a longer stroke。 An example follows in the next frame。 
貫	If one is asked to think of associations for the word pierce、 among the first to come to mind is that of piercing one’s ears to hold earrings、 a quite primitive form of self－mutilation that has survived into the 21st century。 The kanji here is read、 top to bottom： mama 。 。 。 oyster。 All you need to do is imagine piercing an ear so that it can hold a mother－of－pearl （actually、 a mamaof－pearl） you have just wrested from an oyster。 ［11］ 取 受 叙 叛 句 
兄	By now kanji like this one should “look like” something to you even though it is more of an “ideogram” than a “pictograph。” The large mouth on top and the human legs below almost jump off the page as a caricature of elder brother、 the one with the big mouth （or if you prefer a kinder image、 the one who “has the say” among all the children）。 ［5］ 只 召  As a primitive this character will take the meaning of teenager、 in accord with the familiar image of the big mouth and the gangling、 clumsy legs。 
克	In this frame we get a chance to use the kanji we just learned in its primitive meaning of teenager。 The needle on top indicates one of the major problems confronting the teenager growing up in today’s world： drugs。 Many of them will fall under the shadow of the needle at some time during those tender years、 but only when a whole generation rises up and decides that “We Shall Overcome” the plague、 will the needle cease to hang over their heads、 as it does in this character。 ［7］ 叮 右 
小	The sense of little in this character is not the same as “a little bit。” That meaning comes in the next frame。 Here little means “small” or “tiny。” The image is one of three little drops、 the first of which （the one in the middle） is written larger so that the kanji has some shape to it。 The point of writing it three times is to rub the point in： little、 little、 nothing but little。 ［3］ 叶 号 司 The primitive of the same shape keeps the same meaning。 Written above a horizontal line、 its form is slightly altered、 the last two strokes turning inwards like this： 聹。 
少	First we need to look at the fourth stroke、 the drop at the bottom that has been extended into a longer diagonal stroke leaning left 。 This happens because a single、 isolated drop will never appear beneath its relative primitive in its normal size、 for fear it would drop off and get lost。 As for the meaning、 let the tiny drop indicate a further belittling of what is already little—thus making it a few of something little。 ［4］  叺 吁 吃 各 
大	Here we have a simple pictograph of a person、 taking up the space of an entire character and giving it the sense of large。 It should not be too hard to locate the two legs and outstretched arms。 ［3］ 合 吉 吊  As a primitive、 we need a diff erent meaning、 since the element representing the human person will come up later。 Therefore、 this shape will become a large dog or、 if you prefer、 a St。 Bernard dog。 In frame 238 we will explain why this choice was made。 
多	“Many moons ago、” begins much of Amerindian folklore—a color ful way of saying “Once upon a time” and a great deal of help for remembering this kanji。 Here we have two moons （three of them would take us back to the beginning of time、 which is further than we want to go）、 lacking the final stroke because they are partially hidden behind the clouds of time。 ［6］ 名 后 吏 吐 向 君 
夕	Just as the word evening adds a touch of formality or romanticism to the ordinary word “night、” so the kanji for evening takes the ordinary looking moon in the night sky and has a cloud pass over it （as we saw in the last frame）。 ［3］ 吝 吟 吠  The primitive keeps the same meaning and connotation as the kanji。
汐	In the next lesson we will meet the character for morning－tide and the element for drops of water。 Meantime we have a perfect blend of picture and idea in this kanji to play on the English word for nightfall、 eventide： drops of water inching their way up the shore in the evening。 ［6］ 否 吩 含 听 吭 吮 
外	On the left 、 the primitive for evening、 and on the right、 that for the magic wand。 Now、 as every magician worth his abracadabra knows、 bringing your magic wand out into the evening air makes your magic much more powerful than if you were to stay indoors。 Hence、 evening and magic wand takes you naturally outside。 ［5］ 吹 吼 
名	Perhaps you have heard of the custom、 still preserved in certain African tribes、 of a father creeping into the tent or hut of his newborn child on the night of the child’s birth、 to whisper into its ear the name he has chosen for it、 before making his choice public。 It is an impressive naming custom and fits in tidily with the way this character is constructed： evening 。 。 。 mouth。 At evening time、 a mouth pronounces the name that will accompany one throughout life。 ［6］ 呀 呈 
石	With a mouth under a cliff、 what else could we have here but the entrance to a secret cavern、 before which a great stone has been rolled so that none may enter。 Perhaps it is the hiding place where Ali Baba and his band of thieves have stored their treasures、 in which case that magic word known to every school child who ever delighted over the tales of the Arabian Nights should be enough to push the stone aside。 But take care—the cliff is steep、 and one slip will send you tumbling down into the ravine below。 ［5］ This is the one and only time that the second stroke in cliff will reach over to the middle of the horizontal stroke。 If you think of the edge jutting outwards （in keeping with the story above）、 the problem should be taken care of。 呉 告 呎 呑 呟 The stone is a quite common primitive element、 which is not restricted to great boulders but used of stones or rocks of any size or shape。 
肖	The word resemblance should suggest、 among other things、 a son’s resemblance to his father。 A “chip off the old block” is the way we oft en put it、 but the character is more simple。 It speaks of a little bit of flesh。 ［7］ 呰 呶  When used as a primitive、 the sense of resemblance is replaced by that of spark or candle。 （If you want an explanation： the kanji for moon also carries a secondary sense of fire、 which we omitted because we are keeping that meaning for other primitives。） 
硝	The word nitrate should immediately suggest a beaker of nitric acid、 which、 as every high－school chemistry student knows、 can eat its way through some pretty tough substances。 Here we imagine pouring it over a rock and watching the sparks fly as it bores a hole through the rock。 ［12］ 咀 咏 
砕	We begin with the two elements on the right、 baseball and needle。 Since they will be coming together from time to time、 let us give the two of them the sense of a game of cricket in which a needle is laid across the wicket。 Then imagine using a rock for a ball。 A smash hit would probably splinter the bat in all directions、 and a smashing pitch would do the same with the needle wicket。 ［9］ 咤 咨 咫 
砂	Good sand for beaches has few or no stones in it。 That means that all of us whose feet have been spoiled by too much time in shoes don’t have to watch our step as we cavort about。 ［9］ 咸 品 
削	Long before the invention of the carpenter’s plane、 people used knives and machetes （or here、 sabers） to smooth out their woodwork。 If you have ever seen the process、 you will have been amazed at the speed and agility with which the adept can plane a hunk of wood into shape。 Indeed、 you can almost see the sparks fly from their sabers。 ［9］ 員 哥 
光	There are really only 2 primitives here、 little and human legs。 The 4th stroke that separates them is added for reasons of aes－ thetics。 （If that doesn’t make sense、 try writing the kanji without it and see how ugly the results look、 even to your beginner’s eye。） Now if you have wondered what those little particles of “dust” are that dance around in the light－rays that come through the window and fall on your desk、 try imagining them as little and disembodied human legs、 and you should have no trouble with this character。 ［6］ 哦 哨 哩 哭 哮 哲 
太	“Plump” is one of those delightful English words that almost sound like their meaning。 No sooner do you hear it than you think of a round and ample－bodied person falling into a sofa like a large drop of oil plopping into a fishbowl—kerrrr－plump！ ［4］ 哺 哽 哿 唄 
器	The picture in this kanji is not a pleasant one。 It shows a large and fluff y St。 Bernard dog stretched out on a table all stuff ed and stewed and garnished with vegetables、 its paws in the air and an apple in its mouth。 At each corner of the table sits an eager but empty mouth、 waiting for the utensils to arrive so the feast can begin。 ［15］ 唏 唕 售 唯 唱 唹 啄 
臭	This character is a bit friendlier to the animal world than the last one。 Our friend the St。 Bernard is alive and well、 its nose in the air sniffing suspiciously aft er something stinking somewhere or other。 ［9］ 啖 啝 
妙	The primitive for woman is on the left （there and at the bottom of another primitive is where you will always find her）、 and to the right the element for few。 When we refer to a woman as exquisite、 we mean to praise her as the sort of person we meet but few and far between。 If you are interested in etymologies、 it might help to recall that the Latin phrase lying at the root of the English word exquisite carries this same sense of “seeking out” the rare from the ordinary。 ［7］ 啼 善 
省	When we think of focusing on something、 we usually take it in a metaphorical sense、 though the literal sense is not far behind。 It means to block out what is nonessential in order to fix our eye on a few important matters。 The kanji suggests picking up a few things and holding them before one’s eye in order to focus on them better。 ［9］ 喊 喜 
厚	When we refer to someone as thick－skinned or thick－headed、 we are usually quick to add—even if only under our breath— something about their upbringing。 Perhaps it is because deep down we cherish the belief that by nature people are basically tender and sensitive。 Be that as it may、 the Japanese character for thick depicts a child abandoned out on the wild cliff s、 exposed to the heat of the sun、 and thus doomed to develop a head and skin as thick as the parent who left it there。 ［9］ 喝 喞 喩 喬 
奇	The elements we are given to work with here are St。 Bernard dog and can。 Lots of phrases pop to mind to attach these words to the keyword、 but they end up too abstract because of the word can。 It is important in such cases （and there will be plenty of them as we go along） to stick closely to the elements、 in this case、 mouth and nails。 Now all we need do is create a fictitious “Strange But True” column in the Sunday funnies、 featuring a St。 Bernard whose mouth has been nailed shut because he was hitting the brandy keg around his neck too hard。 ［8］ 営 嗚 
川	We have taken the image of a river stream over into English to describe things that fall down in straight lines、 or ripple along in lines。 All of this is more than evident in the kanji given here、 a pictograph of a stream。 ［3］ 嗜 嗟 嗣  As a primitive、 this character adds to the meaning of stream the more vivid image of a flood。 Note、 however、 that there are certain small changes in the writing of the element、 depending on where it appears relative to other elements： on the left 、 it is written 川 on the top、 it is written 巛 on the bottom、 it is written 職 
州	Here we see drops of land （little islets） rising up out of a stream、 creating a kind of sandbar or breakwater。 Ever wonder how the state－line is drawn between states separated by a river？ If there were little drops of land as in the kanji、 there’d be nothing to it。 ［6］ 嗤 嗷 嗹 嗽 嗾 嘆 
順	In primitive language、 this character would read stream 。 。 。 head。 And that turns out to be convenient for remembering its meaning of obey。 Either one obeys the person who is head of an organization or else obeys by following the stream of opinion （“current” practice、 we call it）。 Both these senses come together in this kanji。 ［12］。 嘸 噂 噌 噴 
水	This character、 which looks a bit like a snowflake、 is actually a pictograph of water—not any particular body of water or movement of water、 but simply the generic name for water。 Should you have any difficulty remembering it、 simply think of a walking stick being dropped vertically into the water、 sending droplets out in all four directions。 Then all you need to learn is how to write it in proper order。 ［4］ 噸 噺 嚀 嚆  As a primitive、 this character can keep its form、 or it can be written with three drops to the left of another primitive、 like this： 氵。 This latter、 as we will see、 is far more common。 
氷	The appearance of the primitive for water in its full form tells us that we have something to do with water here。 The extra drop to the left 、 added as a second stroke、 changes the picture from a splash caused by a walking stick dropped into water to form an icicle。 If it helps、 when you hold an icicle up to the light、 you can usually see little crystallizations of five－pointed stars inside of it、 which is the shape we have in this kanji。 ［5］ 嚇 嚊 嚏 嚔 嚠 
永	This kanji also uses the full form of water、 though its meaning seems to have nothing at all to do with water。 Remember what William Blake said about seeing “infinity in a grain of sand and eternity in an hour”？ Well、 reading this character from top to bottom、 we see “eternity in a drop of water。” ［5］ 嚢 嚥 嚮 嚴 嚶 
泉	Call to mind the image of a fresh、 bubbling spring of water、 and you will probably notice how the top of the spring you are thinking of、 the part where the “bubbling” goes on、 is all white。 Happily、 the white is just where it should be、 at the top、 and the water is at the bottom。 ［9］ 囃 囈 囎 囑 囓  We will keep this image of a spring when using this kanji as a primitive、 but not without first drawing attention to a slight change that distinguishes the primitive from the kanji。 The final 4 strokes （the element for water） are abbreviated to the three small drops that we learned earlier as the kanji for little、 giving us： 聽。 
原	Though the kanji is broad enough to embrace both meanings、 the meadow you should imagine here is not a flatland plain but a mountain meadow in the Austrian Alps。 （Perhaps the opening scene of “The Sound of Music” will help。） Simply think of little springs bubbling up across the meadow to form a sort of path that leads you right to the brink of a precipitous cliff。 Now if you can see Schwester Maria skipping along merrily、 dodging in and out of the springs、 and then falling headlong over the cliff、 you have a ridiculous story that should help fix this kanji in memory。 ［10］ 囘 団 囱 
願	A meadow and a head are all we are given to work with in the kanji for petition。 Since the key word already suggests something like a formal request made of some higher power、 let us imagine a gigantic Wizard－of－Oz head located in the middle of the flowery meadow we used in the last frame。 Then just picture people kneeling hopefully before it、 petitioning for whatever it is they want。 （The scarecrow wanted brains、 the lion、 courage、 and the tin man a heart。 What about you？） ［19］ 圉 土 
泳	The primitive to the left 、 you will recall from frame 130、 represents water。 To the right、 we see the kanji for eternity。 Knowing how much children like swimming、 what could be a better image of eternal bliss than an endless expanse of water to swim in without a care in the world？ ［8］ 在 圻 
沼	Unlike the meadow with its cliff s、 the marshlands are low and near a source of water that feeds them until they get soggy through and through。 Why certain land becomes marshy is probably due to the fact that it felt thirsty、 and so tried its best to seduce the water over to its side。 But、 like most inordinate seductions、 the last state of the victim is worse than the first。 Hence the slushy marsh。 ［8］ 均 坑 
沖	This kanji could hardly be simpler。 The key word open sea readily suggests being out in the middle of a great body of water。 Thinking of it in this way should avoid confusion with the kanji for “open、” which we will meet later on。 ［7］ 坤 坪 
江	Unlike the river、 the ocean、 the lake、 and the pond、 the creek is oft en no more then a dribble of water trickling down a small gully。 While the geological history of the larger bodies of water is hard to surmise sometimes、 all of us know from our childhood how creeks are made。 You probably even dug one or two in your time。 All you need to do is find a mainstream of water somewhere and dig a little path into dry land。 The creek is thus a lesson in water－craft、 as this kanji would agree。 ［6］ 垈 垓 
汁	To make soup、 one begins with water and then starts adding things to it、 oft en left overs from the icebox。 This is how the thick soup or stew called “seven－in－one” is made。 This kanji does it three better、 giving us a ten－ingredient soup。 ［5］ 垣 垪 
潮	Before we get to explaining this character、 take a look at it and see if you can figure out the primitive elements on your own…。 On the left is the water—that much is easy。 On the right we have only one primitive、 the kanji for morning learned back in frame 
源	With the advice of the last frame in mind、 it is easy to see water and meadow in this character for source。 Both in its etymology （it has a common parent with the word “surge”） and in popular usage、 source suggests the place water comes from。 In this kanji、 it is under the meadow、 where we just saw it breaking the surface in those bubbly little springs。 ［13］ 埣 堊 
活	When we speak of a lively personality or a lively party、 we immediately think of a lot of chatter。 This kanji depicts the idea of lively by having tongues babble and splash around like flowing water。 ［9］  堙 堰 
消	Among the many things water is useful for is extinguishing fires、 and that is just what we have here。 First of all、 take the water at the left as the drops of water that are used to depict water in general。 In the best of all possible worlds、 the most effi － cient way to extinguish a fire would be to see that each drop of water hits one spark of the conflagration。 An unthinkable bit of utopian fire fighting、 you say to yourself、 but helpful for assigning this key word its primitives。 ［10］ 堵 塑 
況	This key word is a connector used to link contrasting phrases and sentences together with much the same flavor as the English phrase but of course。 Just picture yourself ready to go off on your first date as a teenager、 and having your mother grill you about your manners and ask you embarrassing questions about your hygiene。 “Did you have a good shower？” “But of course…、” you reply、 annoyed。 So water and teenager combine to give us but of course。 ［8］ 塗 塢 
河	The character in this frame represents a step up from the stream we met in frame 127； it is a full－sized river。 The water to the left tells us what we are dealing with、 and the can at the right tells us that our “little engine that could” has now become amphibious and is chugging down the Mighty Mississip’ like a regular riverboat。 ［8］ 塰 境 
泊	When you stop at an inn for an overnight rest、 all you expect is a bit of water for a wash and a set of clean white sheets to wrap your weary bones in。 ［8］ 増 墫 
湖	Water 。 。 。 old 。 。 。 flesh。 You have heard of legends of people being abandoned in the mountains when they had become too old to work。 Well、 here is a legend about people being set adrift in the waters of a stormy lake because their flesh had gotten too old to bear the burdens of life。 ［12］ 墺 壇 壓 
測	Connoting the measurement of the depth of water、 the key word fathom begins with the water primitive。 To its right、 we see the compound－primitive for rule （frame 88） which we learned in the sense of a “ruler” or “measure。” Hence、 when we rule water we fathom it。 What could be simpler？ But be careful； its simplicity is deceptive。 Be sure to picture yourself fathoming a body of water several hundred feet deep by using a ruler of gargantuan proportions。 ［12］ 壘 壮 
土	I don’t like it any more than you do、 but this kanji is not the pictograph it is trumped up to be： a mound of soil piled on the ground。 All I can recommend is that you memorize it as it is。 Anyway、 it will be occurring with such frequency that you have almost no chance of forgetting it、 even if you try。 ［3］ 壯 声 壱  As a primitive、 the sense of soil is extended to that of ground because of its connection with the kanji for the same （frame  515）。 From there it also takes the added meanings of dirt and land。 
吐	We have here a rather small mouth （it is always compressed when set on the left ） next to a much larger piece of dirt。 It is not hard to imagine what you might do if you got a mouth full of dirt。 As least I know what I would do： spit it out as fast and far as I could！ ［6］ 壹 壼 
圧	One of the things that causes the erosion of soil is the excessive pressure of the topsoil on the lower soil。 This can be caused by any number of things from heavy rainfall to heavy buildings to the absence of sufficient deep－rooted vegetation to hold the layers together。 Here we see a steep cliff without a tree in sight。 The slightest pressure on it will cause a landslide、 which、 with a little help from your imagination、 you will be able to see happening in this character。 ［5］ 夂 夋 
埼	The cape pictured here is a jut of land like Cape Cod。 The soil on the left tells us we have to do with land、 and the strange on the right tells us it is a cape where unusual things go on。 Put a haunted house on it、 an eerie sky overhead、 and a howling wind rustling through the trees、 and you have yourself a picture of Cape Strange （or、 if you prefer、 Cape Odd）。 ［11］ 外 大 
垣	The hedge depicted in this frame is not your ordinary run－ofthe－suburbs shrubbery、 but the miraculous hedge of briar roses that completely spanned the castle grounds in which Sleeping Beauty lay for a hundred years、 so that none but her predestined beloved could find his way through it。 ［9］ 夫 夳 
圭	Now I am going to do something unusual。 The character in this frame is going to get one meaning and the primitive another、 with no relation at all between the two。 In time、 I hope you will see how helpful this is。 The kanji key word、 squared jewel、 depicts a mammoth precious stone、 several feet high、 made by piling up large heaps of soil on top of one another。 Not something you would want to present your betrothed on your wedding day、 but a good image for remembering this rare character、 used chiefly in personal names nowadays。 ［6］ 夸 夾 奄 奇 奈 奉  As a primitive、 we shall use this character to mean ivy、 that creepy vegetation that covers the surface of the ground to form a sort of “second” ground that can get somewhat tricky to walk on without tripping。 
封	Think of the key word seal as referring to a letter you have written and are preparing to close。 Instead of using the traditional wax seal、 you glue a sprig of ivy on the outside。 In this way the elements ivy and glue give you a curious and memorable way to seal your secret letters。 ［9］ 奔 奘 
涯	After seeing a constant horizon of water、 water everywhere for months at sea、 could there be anything more delightful to the eyes than to look astern and see the ivy－clad cliff s of land on a new horizon？ Of course、 you’d need the eyes of a stellar telescope to recognize that the vegetation was in fact ivy、 but the phrase “ivy－clad cliff s” has such a nice ring to it that we won’t worry about such details。 ［11］ 奝 奢 奪 
寺	You have heard of people “attaching” themselves to a particular sect？ Here is your chance to take that metaphor literally and imagine some fellow walking into a Buddhist temple with a fervent resolve to attach himself to the place。 Since there is plenty of unused land around the precincts、 he simply picks out a suitable patch、 brushes the soles of his feet with glue、 steps down firmly、 and so joins the Buddhist temple as a “permanent member。” ［6］ 女 好 
時	“What is time？” asked St。 Augustine in his memoirs。 “Ask me not、 and I know。 Ask me、 and I cannot tell you。” Here we have the kanji’s answer to that perennial riddle。 Time is a sun rising over a Buddhist temple。 It sounds almost like a Zen kōan whose repetition might yield some deep secret to the initiated。 At any rate、 imagining a monk seated in meditation pondering it might help us remember the character。 ［10］ 妄 妛 
均	The level this key word refers to is not the carpenter’s tool but rather the even surface of a thing。 It pictures soil being scooped up into a ladle and then made level （apparently because one is measuring soil）。 The excess drops of soil are brushed off the top、 which accounts for the added drop at the ladle’s edge。 ［7］ 妤 妬 妲 
火	Just as sitting before a fire enlivens the imagination and lets you see almost anything you want to in the flames、 this kanji is so simple it lets you see almost any sort of fire you want to see。 It no longer makes a good pictograph、 but I invite you to take a pencil and paper and play with the form—first writing it as shown below and then adding lines here and there—to see what you can come up with。 Everything from matchbooks to cigarette lighters to volcanic eruptions to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah have been found here。 No doubt you、 too、 will find something interesting to bend your memory around these four simple strokes。 ［4］ 妹 妺 妻 妾  To avoid confusion later on、it is best to keep to the meaning of a fireplace （or hearth） or a raging conflagration like a forest fire for this kanji’s primitive meaning。 Another primitive element for fire、 based on this one、 is written 灬 and will mean flames、 cauldron、 cooking fire、 or an oven fire。 
炎	A fire belongs in the hearth、 not over it。 When the fire spreads to the rest of the house、 we have an inflamed house。 And as with any inflammation—including those that attack our bodies—the danger is always that it might spread if not checked。 This is the sense behind the reduplication of the element for fire、 one atop the other ［8］ 姆 姉 始 姍 姑 姓 委 
煩	The existential condition of anxiety that arises from the inevitable frustration of our worldly passions is contained in this character。 The head is set afire、 causing deep torment of spirit （and a whopper of a headache）。 ［13］ 姚 姜 姥 姦 娉 
淡	The primitives in this kanji read： water 。 。 。 inflammation。 Taking inflammation in its medical sense、 the first water－related inflammation that pops into mind is dehydration、 the principal symptom of which is that it makes one shrivel up and look very、 very thin。 If that is hard to remember、 try thinking it backwards： a very thin chap passes by and you imagine him suff ering from （being inflamed with） dehydration （hence the element for water）。 ［11］ 娚 娶 
灯	Since it is very hard to read by the fireplace without going blind from the flickering of the flames or burning up from the heat、 our ancestors invented a way to nail down a bit of that fire、 just enough to light up the text of their evening newspapers and no more。 Voilà！ The lamp。 ［6］ 婆 婚 
畑	Looking at the primitives、 a fireplace and a rice field、 we find the essential ingredients for a farm： a warm hearth to sit by at night、 and a well－plowed field to grow one’s crops in by day。 ［9］ 婬 媼 
災	Of all of nature’s disasters、 this kanji picks out two of the worst： floods and fires。 To recall the disposition of the elements、 think of nature’s solution to nature’s own problem： a great flood pouring down over a great forest fire。 ［7］ 媽 媾 嫁 嫌 
灰	The kanji for ashes naturally includes the primitive for fire、 or more specifically、 a fireplace。 Now what do you do with that bucket of ashes you have just cleaned out of the fireplace？ You walk to the edge of a cliff and tip it upside down、 watching as they are swept away in the wind like a swarm of gray mosquitoes。 Thus the fire、 once it has turned to ashes、 ends up at the bottom of the cliff。 ［6］ 嫖 嫦 
点	If you look into the flickering of a fire for a long time and then turn aside、 you will see spots before your eyes。 Although nobody ever thought of such a thing before—as least as far as I know、 they didn’t—imagine using those spots as a technique for fortune－telling。 The old witch sits before her cauldron and watches the spots that show up when she turns to look at you、 and from that tells your fortune。 Think of it as a kind of spot－check on your future。 ［9］ 嬋 嬌 嬖 嬢 嬪 
照	Although the range of possible meanings that the kanji for illuminate can have is about as rich as the connotations of the English word、 we need to focus on just one of them： to make something shine。 If you glaze a pot and put it into the oven to fire it、 you in fact illuminate it。 Hence the kanji for illuminate compares the kanji for shining with the primitive element for the oven’s fire。 ［13］ 嬶 子 孖 
魚	The composition of this kanji shows three elements、 which we list in the order of their writing： bound up 。 。 。 rice field 。 。 。 cooking fire。 Not much to work with at first sight。 But we can join them together by thinking of a three－part story： first a fish is caught and bound up on a line with its unfortunate school－mates； when the fisherman gets home、 he cuts off the head and tosses it、 with the entrails、 out into the rice fields for fertilizer； and the rest he sets in a skillet over a cooking fire for his supper。 ［11］ 料 斤 斬 
漁	To the story we have just made about fish、 this kanji for the profession of fishing adds yet another element before the others： namely the water、 where the fish was happily at home before being caught、 disemboweled、 and eaten。 Be sure to get a clear image of the water when you put it all together。 ［14］ 新 旌 
里	That’s right—a ri。 Don’t bother looking it up in your English dictionary； it’s a Japanese word for measuring distances。 One ri is about 4 kilometers or 2。5 miles。 The kanji depicts how the measure came to be used。 Atop we see the rice field、 and below the element for land。 Those four sections you see in the rice field （and which we made mention of when first we introduced the character in frame 14） are actually measurements of land、 much the same as farm－sections in the United States have given us the notion of a “country mile。” The land division based on the size of a rice field is called a ri。 ［7］ 字 存 孚 孛 孜 孝 孟  To get a more concrete primitive meaning for this kanji、we shall refer to it as a computer、 a meaning deriving from the kanji for logic、 which we will meet in Lesson 12。 
黒	Like most things electrical、 a computer、 too、 can overheat。 Just imagine flames pouring out of it and charring the keyboard、 the monitor、 and your desk a sooty black color。 ［11］ 季 孤 孥 学 孩 孫 孮 孱 孳 孵 學 
墨	Besides meaning black ink、 this kanji also appears in the word for an inked string that is pulled taut and snapped to mark a surface、 much the same as one might used a chalked string。 Here it is used to mark off the dirt with black lines for a football game （played、 I presume、 on a white field）。 ［14］ 宏 官 
鯉	These are the same carp you see in Japanese “carp streamers。” Only here we find a small home computer or two strung on the line by a father anxious for his son not only to have the courage and determination of a carp swimming upstream、 but also the efficiency and memory of a computer。 Ugh。 ［18］ 宨 宸 
量	Think of quantity as having to do with measuring time and distance、 and the rest is simple： you have a quantity of time in the new day that begins with nightbreak、 and a quantity of distance in the rural ri。 ［12］ 寂 寃 寐 
厘	No doubt you will find it in your heart to forgive me for forcing yet another Japanese word on you in this frame。 It is not the last time it will happen in this book、 but I can assure you they are used only when absolutely necessary。 One rin is equal to about 1／1000 of a yen—or rather was worth that much when it still made economic sense to mint them。 While inflation took its toll on this kanji as a monetary unit、 it survived with the not at all surprising sense of something “very、 very tiny。” The kanji shows a cliff with a computer under it、 apparently because it has been pushed over into the abyss by someone fed up with the thing。 The total market value of one home computer that has fallen over rock and bramble for several hundred feet： about one rin！ ［9］ 寓 寡 
埋	When we speak of burying something （or someone、 for that matter）、 we usually mean putting them under ground。 Only here、 we are burying our beloved computer that has served us so well these past years。 Behind us a choir chants the “Dies irae、 dies illa” and there is much wailing and grief among the bystanders as they pass by to shovel a little dirt into what will be its final resting place。 R。I。P。 ［10］ 寥 寮 Before going any further、 we might pause a moment to look at precisely where the primitive elements were placed in the kanji of the last frame： the ground to the left and the computer to the right。 Neither of these is an absolutely fixed position。 The kanji for spit （frame 151）、 for instance、 puts ground on the right、 and that for plains （frame 1596） will put the computer on the left 。 While there is no reason to bother memorizing any “rules、” a quick glance through a few general guidelines may help。 Use them if they help； if not、 simply adjust the story for a problem character in such a way as to help you remember the position of the elements relative to one another。 In any case、 here are the guidelines that follow from the kanji treated up to this point： 
同	The primitives given are one and mouth under a hood。 Take the key word to connote the sameness that characterizes the life in a community of monks。 They all have the same habits、 including the “habit” they wear on their backs。 Here we see the monk’s cowl、 drawn down over the eyes so that all you can see when you look at him is a mouth。 But since monks also speak their prayers in common、 it is but a short step to think of one mouth under a hood as the kanji for the sameness of monastic life。 ［6］ 寶 寸 寿  As a primitive、 this kanji will mean monks dressed in a common habit。 
洞	The key word den refers to an animal lair hollowed out in the side of a mountain。 Now if we keep to the image of the monas－ tic life as an image for same、 we can picture a den of wild beasts dressed up in habits and living the common life in a mountain cavern。 To bring in the element of water we need only give them a sacred “puddle” in the center of their den、 the focus of all their pious attentions。 ［9］ 射 尊 
胴	The word trunk refers to the part of the body that is left when you have “truncated” all the limbs。 I can hardly think of any reason for doing so、 unless one were lumberjacking corpses and needed to have them all properly pruned and made the same so they could be floated downstream without causing a body－jam。 ［10］ 小 尠 
向	Something referred to as “over yonder” is usually far off in the distance and barely within sight—like a wee drop in the distance—and is usually an expression used in giving directions or pointing something out。 Hence this kanji begins with a drop。 Then we find a sort of transparent helmet with no eyes or nose、 but only a prominent mouth under it、 obviously an extraterrestrial。 And what is it jabbering on about with its mouth open like that？ Why、 about his spaceship way over yonder with its fuel tank on empty。 ［6］ 尢 尨 尸 
尚	Above we see the primitive for little attached to one of those glass canopies you might use to display a family heirloom。 The littleness is important、 because what is in fact on display is the shrunken、 stuff ed、 and mounted mouth of an esteemed ancestor。 We may be used to esteeming the words our forebears leave behind、 but here we also esteem the very mouth that spoke them。 I leave it to you to imagine a suitable place in your room for displaying such an unusual conversation piece。 ［8］ 尻 尽 局 
字	Here is the character for character itself。 Not just kanji、 but any written character from hieroglyphs to Sanskrit to our own Roman alphabet。 It shows us simply a child in a house。 But let us take advantage of the double meaning of the key word to note that just as a child born to a Japanese house is given characters for its name、 so it is also stamped with the character of those who raise it from infancy on。 ［6］ 屈 届 屋 屍 屎 屏 
守	The notion of guarding something easily brings to mind the image of someone standing guard、 like the royal soldiers in front of Buckingham Palace or the Pope’s Swiss Guard。 The whole idea of hiring guards is that they should stick like glue to your house to protect it from unwanted prowlers。 So go ahead and glue a guard to your house in imagination。 ［6］ 屓 屠 
完	In order not to confuse the key word perfect with others nearly synonymous in meaning、 pull it apart to have a look at its native Latin roots。 Per－factum suggests something so “thoroughly made or done” that nothing more needs to be added to it。 Now look at the kanji、 which does something similar。 We see a house that has been made perfectly from its beginnings in the foundation to the roof on the top。 Now return to frame 97 and make sure not to confuse this key word with the kanji for complete。 ［7］ 履 山 
宣	Under the primitive for house we meet the kanji for span。 Think of the key word in its religious sense of missionary preaching： “proclaiming the good news to all nations” and “shouting it from the housetops。” That should be enough to help you remember this simple kanji、 used in fact both for traditional missionary work as well as for one of its contemporary replacements： advertising。 ［9］ 岌 岨 
宵	As the key word hints、 the kanji in this frame refers to the late evening or early morning hours、 well aft er one should be in bed asleep。 It does this by picturing a house with a candle in it。 The reason is obvious： whoever is living there is “burning the candle at both ends、” and working night aft er night into the wee hours。 ［10］ 岬 岻 
安	To be told that the place of the woman is in the house may not sit well with modern thought、 but like all cultural habits the Chinese characters bear the birthmarks of their age。 So indulge yourself in a Norman Rockwell image of relaxing aft er a hard day’s work： the scruff y and weary woman of the house slouched asleep in the living room chair、 her hair in curlers and a duster lying in her lap。 ［6］ 峅 峠 
宴	To carry on from the last frame、 we note the entire day of work that comes between a woman and her house in preparing for a dinner banquet、 pictorially “interrupting” her relaxation。 ［10］ 峩 峰 峺 
寄	Let the idea of drawing near suggest something dangerous or eerie that one approaches with fear and trembling。 Here we see a strange house—perhaps the haunted House of Usher that Edgar Allen Poe immortalized、 or the enchanted Gingerbread House that lured Hansel and Gretel to draw near。 ［11］ 崇 崘 
富	Here we have the original character on which the primitive element for wealth is based。 In keeping with the story introduced back then、 note how all the wealth is kept under the roof of the same house。 ［12］ 崛 嵐 
貯	To avoid confusing this frame with the last one、 try to think of savings as actual money。 The only diff erence is that our currency is not paper bills but shells、 a not uncommon unit of exchange in older civilizations。 The nail under the roof of the house points to a hiding place in the raft ers on which one strings up one’s shells for safekeeping。 ［12］ 嶄 嶌 嶝 
木	Here we see a pictograph of a tree、 showing the main trunk in the long vertical stroke and the boughs in the long horizontal stroke。 The final two strokes sweep down in both directions to indicate the roots。 Although it may look similar at first sight to the kanji for water （frame 130）、 the order in which it is written is completely diff erent and this aff ects its final appearance。 ［4］ 嵒 嵓 嵜 嵩  As a primitive、 this kanji can mean tree or wood。 When the last two strokes are detached from the trunk （膈）、 we shall change its meaning to pole、 or wooden pole。 
林	Learn this frame in connection with the next one。 A grove is a small cluster of trees。 Hence the simple reduplication of the kanji for tree gives us the grove。 ［8］ 嶢 嶬 嶮 嶷 嶼 
森	A forest is a large expanse of trees、 or “trees、 trees everywhere、” to adopt the expression we used back in frames 22 and 23。 ［12］ 巍 巖 巡 
桂	Unless you are a botanist、 you are not likely to know what a Japanese Judas－tree looks like、 and probably never even heard of it before、 but the name is sufficiently odd to make remembering it easy。 Using the primitives as our guide、 we define it as a tree with ivy growing down its branches in the shape of a hangman’s rope。 ［10］ 巧 巳 
柏	This kanji calls to mind the famous myth of the “golden bough。” As you may recall、 what made the sacred oak in the forest of Diana the Huntress outside of Rome “golden” were the white berries of the mistletoe that grew in the branches of the tree。 When the light of the sun shone through them、 they turned yellow and the branch to which they clung appeared to be made of gold。 （If you don’t know the story、 take a break today and hunt it down in a dictionary of myth and fable。 Even if you forget the kanji—which、 of course、 you won’t—the story of the mistletoe and the fate it brought to Balder the Beautiful is one you are sure to remember。） ［9］ 巻 帆 
枠	You might think of the frame this character refers to as the sort of frame we have created by drawing a dark line around this kanji and its explanation。 Then think of that line as made of very thin wood； and finally note how each time the line bends it forms a 90° angle、 thus giving us the nine and the ten。 ［8］ 帖 帚 帝 
梢	As the days grow shorter and shorter、 or so the northern European myth goes、 the fear grows that the sun will take its leave of us altogether、 abandoning the world to total darkness。 Fixing candles to the branches of evergreen trees、 it was believed、 would lure the sun back （like things attracting like things）、 whence the custom of the lighted tree that eventually found its way into our Christmas customs。 The story is a lot longer and more complex than that、 but it should help to fix the image of climb ing high up into the treetops to fix candles on the tree。 ［11］ 帯 幀 
棚	One oft en thinks of books as “good companions、” but here it is the shelf we store them on that is the companion。 The reasons should be obvious： it is made of the same stuff 、 wood、 and spends a lot more time with them than we do！ Here again、 be careful not to let the rationality of the explanation get in the way before you turn it into a proper story。 ［12］ 幇 幢 
杏	Since apricots can be eaten just as they fall from the trees、 picture this mouth agape at the bottom of a tree （just as the elements have it）、 waiting for apricots to fall into it。 ［7］ 平 并 
桐	Since you probably don’t know what a paulownia tree is、 we shall let the key word suggest the phrase “the Little Brothers of St。 Paulownia。” It is a short step to associate the tree with the monks to its right。 （For the curious、 the name of this oriental tree really comes from a Russian princess、 Anna Pavlovna。） ［10］ 幻 広 
植	You have no doubt seen how people practicing the Japanese art of bonsai take those helpless little saplings and twist them into crippled dwarves before they have a chance to grow up as they should。 The more proper way to plant a young tree and give it a fair shake in life is to set it into the earth in such a way that it can grow up straight。 ［12］ 序 座 
枯	What makes a tree begin to wither up、 and perhaps even die、 is a kind of arteriosclerosis that keeps its sap from flowing freely。 Usually this is due to simple old age、 as this character shows us。 Be sure to picture a wrinkled old tree、 withering away in a retirement center so that the commonsense explanation does not take over。 ［9］ 庶 廃 
朴	As all magicians who have passed their apprenticeship know、 one makes one’s wand out of a hazel branch and is careful not to alter the natural form of the wood。 For the magic of the wand derives its power from its association with the hidden laws of nature、 and needs therefore to be kept in its crude、 natural state。 ［6］ 廏 廓 
村	The character for village was associated with rice fields （frame  92）。 That for town、 a step up on the evolutionary path to cities、 shows a circle of trees glued together to measure off the confines of a town。 ［7］ 廝 廡 
相	The prefix inter－ stirs up associations of cooperation among people。 From there we read off the elements： tree 。 。 。 eye。 With only a slight leap of the imagination、 those two words call to mind the scriptural proverb about first taking the block of timber out of one’s own eye before helping your neighbors remove the splinters in their eyes。 What more useful rule for interhuman relationships、 and what more useful tool for remembering this kanji！ ［9］ 廩 廴 
机	We need to fix imagination here on two things to learn the kanji for desk： the wonderful rough wood of which it has been hewn and the wind that blows across it、 sending your papers flying all over the room。 These two elements、 written in that order、 dictate how to write the character。 ［6］ 建 廼 
本	Recalling that books are made of paper、 and paper made of trees、 one might think of a book as a slice of a tree。 Can you see the “cross－cut” in the trunk of the tree？ Picture it as a chain－saw cutting you out a few books with which to start your own private library。 ［5］ 弃 弄 
札	The tags you see hanging on trees in public places in Japan are helpful to identify what sort of trees they are。 Next time you see one、 imagine the bit of wire that fixes the tag to the branch as a large fishhook。 really imagine it、 illogical as it is、 and you will never have trouble with this kanji again。 ［5］ 弌 弍 
暦	Look at this character in reverse order、 from bottom up。 First we see the primitive for days、 an appropriate enough way to begin a calendar。 Next we see a grove of trees growing under a cliff。 The laws of nature being what they are、 the trees would be stunted under such conditions、 unless they were strong enough to keep growing upwards until they passed through the layers of rock and soil、 right up to the surface。 Now imagine that in those little boxes marking off the days on your wall calendar、 you see that very process taking place step by step： 365 or so time－lapse pictures of that grove of trees each month、 from January under the cliff to December on top of the cliff。 The story is not as complex as it sounds、 particularly if you happen to have a calendar nearby and can flip through it with this image in mind。 ［14］ 弐 弛 弦 
案	Without much eff ort、 the elements relax 。 。 。 tree suggest a hammock strung between two trees in your backyard、 and you stretched out in it、 hands folded behind your head、 planning something or other。 After all、 it’s something we all do from time to time： kick up our legs on the nearest piece of furniture and daydream about the best plan of action to take。 Be sure to relate the relaxation to the tree、 so that you don’t end up with something else in its place （like “legs” or “desk” or “table”）。 ［10］ 弱 弼 
燥	Parchment、 made from animal skins、 was the most common form of writing material used until the beginning of the nineteenth century。 When paper took over、 a method was devised to make artificial parchment from wood pulp。 The fire at the left and in the “strong” position reminds us of the root word、 “parch、” since nothing dries、 puckers、 wrinkles、 and scorches quite like fire。 And here is how we put it all together。 Take a sheet of paper （a “wood－good、”）、 wet it、 and hold it over a hearth in your mind’s eye。 Now watch as it parches the paper、 leaving it with a strange and bumpy surface resembling parchment。 ［17］ 彈 彜 彦 
未	As the key word suggests、 this kanji has to do with something not quite over and done with。 More concretely、 it shows us a tree that is not yet fully grown。 The extra short stroke in the upper branches shows new branches spreading out、 leaving one with the feeling that the tree has a ways to go yet before it reaches maturity。 In other words、 the kanji conveys its mean ing pictographically、 playing on the earlier pictograph of the tree。 ［5］ 彧 彩 彪 彫 彬 
末	This character is best learned in connection with that of the previous frame。 The first stroke shows a branch that is longer than the main branch、 indicating that the tree has reached the extremity of its growth、 so that its branches stop spreading and start drooping downwards。 Be sure to keep this imagery in mind、 to avoid confusing this key word with synonyms that will appear later。 ［5］ 彭 彰 影 彳 彷 
沫	The splash this kanji refers to is the dash of water against the rocks、 with all the foam and spray that this creates。 If you think of a splash in this sense as a wave that has run its full course and reached its extremity、 namely the seashore、 and if you think of it pictorially in your mind’s eye、 this somewhat rare （but oh－soeasy－to－learn） kanji is yours for good。 ［8］ 彿 径 
味	When a tree has not yet finished growing、 it produces fruit with a full flavor。 When the official taster （the professional mouth to the left ） determines that full flavor has been reached、 the tree is pruned back so that it remains permanently not yet grown。 A neat little agricultural trick and an easy way to see the sense of flavor hidden in this character。 ［8］ 很 徑 
妹	The younger sister in the family is the woman in the family who、 like the newest branch in a tree、 is not yet old enough or mature enough to do everything the elder sister can do （see frame 413）。 ［8］ 得 御 
朱	That red－orange color we call vermilion is found in nature during the fall when the leaves lose their sugar and begin to change color。 This kanji depicts the very last leaf on a tree in the fall （the drop hung in the first stroke）、 the leaf that has not yet fallen as it one day must。 Look at its color—vermilion。 （Well、 not really。 The truth is、 vermilion is made from a mercuric sulfide、 but I’m sure you will agree that autumn leaves are a lot easier to work with。） ［6］ 徨 復 循 徭 微 徳 
株	The stocks bought and sold on the market by the tens of millions each day get their name from a comparison to a healthy tree、 in which one takes “stock” in the hopes that it will grow and produce more and more trees like itself。 Usually good stocks are referred to as “blue chip、” but here we are asked to associate the key word with the color vermilion、 perhaps because one can assess the value of a tree from the color of its autumn leaves。 ［10］ 徼 忖 
若	Here we see a flower held in the right hand。 You can imagine yourself in a magic garden where flowers picked with the right hand grant eternal youth； and those picked with the left 、 premature senility。 Go ahead、 pick one with each hand and watch what happens。 ［8］ 応 忝 忞 忠 忤 忱 
草	Perhaps you know the custom of seeding grass randomly or in some particular pattern with the flower called the crocus、 which blooms for a few days each year in early spring。 As the grass begins to turn green again aft er winter has passed、 these tiny flowers dot up here and there。 Now just look out your window at a patch of grass somewhere and think what a nice idea it would be to have your name spelled out in flowers once as a sort of early harbinger of spring。 ［9］ 忻 怒 
苦	The picture of suff ering we are given here is that of a flower that has grown old。 When a flower ages、 it pales and dries up、 and probably even suff ers。 If you think that plants are incapable of such feelings、 then ask yourself why so many people believe that talking to their flowers helps them bloom better。 ［8］ 怙 怡 
寛	The house of flowers or “hothouse” has become a metaphor for a narrow－minded、 biased、 and intolerant attitude distrustful of change。 Tolerance、 in contrast、 is open－minded and welcomes novelty。 The way to encourage tolerance in those who lack it is first to have them see through their own hothouse attitudes、 which is the very counsel we are given in this kanji。 ［13］ 性 怪 恃 
薄	Take a good look at this kanji： the “strong” element here is really the flower、 not the water as you might have thought on first glance。 To the right is the acupuncturist from frame 47。 Taking the key word to connote diluting the vital humors of the body、 we can imagine our acupuncturist performing his task with flowers in place of needles、 and using their hollow stems to pipe water into the body of the patient。 ［16］ 恒 恚 恪 
葉	Three elements are given here： flower 。 。 。 generation 。 。 。 tree。 The first and last seem logical enough、 since it is the leaf that feeds the flowers on a tree。 The element for generation interposed between the two suggests that the movement of a tree from one generation to the next is like its “turning over a new leaf。” ［12］ 恭 悁 悉 
模	Ah、 but haven’t modern graveyards become a parody of their ancestors！ The flowers are plastic、 the writing on the stones is unimaginative and cold、 and the whole thing looks more like a marble orchard than a right and proper graveyard。 This kanji continues with the modernization trend by picturing imitation trees in the graveyard。 But of course、 how convenient！ They don’t need pruning or fertilizing、 their leaves don’t fall、 and they remain the same color all year long。 ［14］ 悦 悼 
漠	Think of the key word as having to do with something viewed through a haze、 or in the twilight and from a distance、 so that only its outlines are vaguely discernible。 Now we are back again to the essence of the true graveyard。 The water may be taken as the sound of waves dashing up against the rocks or the dripping of moisture on cold rock—anything that helps you associate vagueness with the graveyard and keep it distinct from the imitation we met in the last frame。 ［13］ 惆 惠 
墓	The mounds of soil with crude wooden crosses set at their head suggests those boot－hill graves we all know from cowboy lore。 The only odd thing about this kanji is that the soil comes under the graveyard、 rather than to its left 、 where we might expect。 Just think of the bodies as “lying under boot－hill” if you have any trouble。 By the way、 this is not the first time、 nor will it be the last、 that we learn a kanji whose key word is the same、 or almost the same、 as a primitive element based on it、 but whose shape differs somewhat。 There is no cause to worry。 By using the primitive in a variety of other characters、 as we have done here、 the confusion will be averted as a matter of course。 In most cases、 as here、 the primitive element is taken from a part of the fuller kanji。 ［13］ 惶 惺 
暮	Imagine that you have chosen the occupation of the keeper of a graveyard and spend your days tending to other’s deadhood in order to make your means of livelihood。 ［14］ 意 暮 
膜	The part of the body first aff ected by a stroll through a haunted graveyard is the skin、 which gets goose bumps。 But we save the word “skin” for another kanji、 and use the odd word “membrane” here。 Think of being so scared through and through that the goose flesh moves from the outside in、 giving you goose membranes。 ［14］ 愧 慂 
苗	To avoid confusion with the image of rice seedlings to appear later、 we shall take these seedlings out of their agricultural setting in the rice fields and into the frame of Brave New World surgery、 where “ideas” or “values” are being implanted into brains like seedlings to insure a harmonious society。 Then you need only imagine them taking root and breaking out into flower right through the tops of the skulls of people walking around on the streets。 ［8］ 慈 慎 
兆	Here we have a pictograph of the back of a turtle、 the two sloping vertical strokes representing the central ridge and the four short strokes the pattern。 Think of reading turtle shells as a way to foretell the future、 and in particular things that portend coming evils。 ［6］ 族 旒 旗 旙 旛 无  When this character is used as a primitive in its full form、 we keep the key－word sense of a portent。 When it appears to the left in its abbreviated form （namely、 the left half only、 丬）、 we shall give it the pictographic sense of a turtle。 
桃	To associate the peach tree with the primitive for a portent、 recall the famous Japanese legend of Momotarō、 the Peach Boy。 It begins once upon a time with a fisherman and his wife who wanted badly to have a child、 but none was born to them。 Then one day the old man caught a giant peach、 out of which jumped a healthy young lad whom they named Peach Boy。 Though the boy was destined to perform heroic deeds、 his birth also portended great misfortune （how else could he become a hero？）。 Thus the tree that is associated with a portent of coming evil comes to be the peach tree。 ［10］ 慙 慥 
眺	To give someone the “evil eye” is to stare at them、 wishing them evil。 The roots of the superstition are old and almost universal throughout the cultures of the world。 In this kanji、 too、 being stared at is depicted as an eye that portends evil。 ［11］ 慯 慶 
犬	We know that the kanji for large takes on the meaning of the St。 Bernard dog when used as a primitive。 In this frame we finally see why。 The drop added as a fourth and final stroke means that we have to do with a normal－sized dog、 which、 compared to the St。 Bernard、 is no more than a drop in the kennel。 ［4］ 慷 慾 憂 憇  As a primitive this character can take two meanings。 In the form given here it will mean a very small dog （which we shall refer to as a chihuahua for convenience sake）。 When it takes the form 犭 to the left of a character、 we shall give it the meaning of a pack of wild dogs。 
状	Did you ever hear the legend of the turtle who fell madly in love with a chihuahua but could not have her because their two families did not like the idea of their children intermarrying？ Like all classic stories of ill－fated love、 this one shows how the young upset the status quo with an emotion older and more power ful than anything their elders have devised to counter it： blind love。 ［7］ 憊 憎 憐 憘 
黙	Oddly enough、 the character for silence shows us a black chihuahua。 Actually、 the cute little critter’s name is Darkness、 as I am sure you remember from the famous song about silence that begins、 “Hello、 Darkness、 my old friend。…” Note how the four dots reach all the way across the bottom of the character。 ［15］  憬 憺 懇 
然	The key word in this frame refers to a suffix that gives the word before it an adjectival quality； hence we refer to it as “sort of thing。” Reverting to the time when dog was more widely eaten than it is today （see frame 121）、 we see here a large cauldron boiling over an oven flame with the flesh of a chihuahua being thrown into the whole concoction to make it into a “hot－diggity、 dog－diggity” sort of thing。 ［12］ 懈 應 懊 懋 懣 懶 
荻	［10］ 懺 懼 懽 懾 戉 
狩	One of the worst problems you have to face when you go hunting is to guard your take from the wild dogs。 If you imagine yourself failing at the task、 you will probably have a stronger image than if you try to picture yourself succeeding。 ［9］ 戊 戌 戍 戔 
猫	Knowing how much dogs love to chase cats、 picture a pack of wild dogs planting “cat－seedlings、” watering them、 and fertilizing them until they can be harvested as a crop of cats for them to chase and torment。 If you begin from the key word and think of a “crop of cats、” you will not confuse this story with the apparently similar story of two frames ago。 ［11］ 戛 戯 
牛	Can you see the “doodle” of a cow that has just been run over by a steamroller？ The small dot in the first stroke shows its head turned to one side、 and the next two strokes、 the four legs。 ［4］ 戰 戲 戳 戴  As a primitive、 the same sense of cow is kept。 Note only that when it is placed over another element、 its tail is cut off 、 giving us 肉。 In this case、 and when the element appears on the left 、 the stroke order is changed。 
特	Despite the strong phonetic similarity、 there will be no problem keeping the key word special distinct from the character we met earlier for specialty （frame 46）、 since the latter has immediate connotations lacking in this kanji。 Anyway、 we shall let the key word of this frame refer to something in a special class all its own—like the sacred cows of India that wander freely without fear of being butchered and ground into hamburger。 Even though the practice is originally a Hindu one、 and in any case no longer followed among the majority of Japanese Buddhist monks、 the Buddha’s refusal to take the life of any sentient being makes it only fitting that the cows should be placed on the sacred grounds of a Buddhist temple in this kanji。 ［10］ 戸 戻 房 所 才 
告	Folklore throughout the world tells us of talking animals who show a wisdom superior to that of human beings、 and that same tradition has found its way into television shows and cartoons right into our own century。 This character depicts revelation through the mouth of a cow、 suggesting oracular utterances about truths hidden to human intelligence。 ［7］ 扎 打 払 托 扠 
先	Take this key word in its physical、 not its temporal、 sense （even though it refers to both）。 If you have a cow with human legs、 as the elements show us here、 it can only be because you have two people in a cow－suit。 I always thought I’d prefer to be the one standing before、 rather than the one that holds up the rear and becomes the “butt” of everyone’s laughter。 ［6］ 扣 扨 扮 托 扶 批 
洗	This character is so logical that one is tempted to let the elements speak for themselves： water 。 。 。 before。 But we have already decided we will not allow such rationalism to creep into our stories。 Not even this once。 Instead、 let us change the character from the Peanuts comic strip called “Pigpen、” who is always preceded by a little cloud of dust and grime、 and rename him “Wash－Out。” Everywhere he walks、 a spray of water goes before him to sanitize everything he touches。 ［9］ 承 把 
介	The idea of something getting jammed into something else is depicted here by having a walking stick get jammed into an umbrella frame by someone shoving it into an already occupied slot in the umbrella stand at the door。 First notice the vertical strokes： on the left is the curved umbrella handle、 and on the right the straight walking stick。 Now try to imagine the two parties tugging at their respective properties like two kids on a wishbone、 creating a scene at the entrance of an elegant restaurant。 ［4］ 抑 抒 抔 投 
界	As the world gets jammed with more and more people、 there is less and less space。 Imagine yourself taking an air flight over a world so densely populated that every bit of it is sectioned off like a gigantic checkerboard （the rice fields）。 If you look closely at the character、 you should be able to see a kind of movement taking place as still more is being jammed into that already narrow space。 ［9］ 抜 抬 
茶	As everyone knows、 tea is made from tea leaves。 But the tea plant itself has its own flowers、 which can be quite beautiful and add a special flavor to the tea、 as the Chinese found out already over 4、600 years ago。 With the image of a terrace of flowering tea bushes in mind、 picture a number of brightly painted and very l－o－n－g wooden poles （frame 195） placed here and there in their midst、 with a tiny umbrella at the top to shade the delicatetasting tea flowers。 ［9］ 抹 押 抽 拂 担 拆 
合	The kanji for fit reads literally、 top to bottom、 as a meeting of mouths—which is a rather descriptive way of speaking of a romantic kiss。 We all know what happens when there is no meeting of minds and when people’s ideas don’t fit with one another。 But this kanji invites us to imagine what happened to the romance of a certain unfortunate couple whose mouths didn’t fit。 ［6］ 拏 拒 
塔	On the left we see a mound of dirt、 and to the right flowers made to fit together。 The two sides combine to create a great pagoda made of dirt、 with flowers by the tens of thousands fitted together for the roofing of each of the layers。 Be sure to put yourself in the scene and fit a few of the flowers in place yourself so that the image works its way into memory with full force。 ［12］ 拗 招 拭 
王	See what you can do to come up with a pictograph of a king’s scepter here that suits your own idea of what it should look like。 You might even begin with the basic element for I beam and then try to fit the remaining third stroke in。 ［4］ 拮 拯 拱 拳  As a primitive、 this can mean either king or scepter、 but it will usually be taken to mean ball、 as an abbreviation of the character in the next frame。 
玉	Note the drop here in the king’s scepter、 which is exactly what you would expect it to be： a precious jewel handed down from of old as a symbol of his wealth and power。 ［5］ 拾 拿  As a primitive、 we can use this to mean either jewel or ball。 When it appears anywhere other than on the left side of a kanji、 it generally takes the same shape as here。 On the left 、 it will be lacking the final stroke、 making it the same as the character in the previous frame、 馬。 
宝	Every house has its treasure、 as every thief knows only too well。 While the things we treasure most are usually of sentimental value、 we take the original sense of the term treasure here and make it refer to jewels kept in one’s house。 ［8］ 指 挙 
珠	Take care to keep the meaning of this kanji distinct from that for jewel。 Think of the most enormous pearl you have ever seen、 a great vermilion－colored ball sitting on your ring—and mak－ ing it extremely difficult to move without falling over from the weight of the thing。 ［10］ 挿 捕 
現	Do not think of a “gift ” here、 but of the present moment、 as distinct from the future and the past。 The kanji gives us a ball in which we see the present—obviously a crystal ball that enables us to see things going on at the present in faraway places。 ［11］ 捨 捺 
狂	A lunatic is literally one driven mad by the light of the moon、 and the most famous of the “looneys” are the legendary lycanthropes or “wolfmen。” Sometimes the transformation is only a temporary phenomenon、 sometimes it is permanent。 In the latter case、 the poor chap takes off on all fours to live with the beasts。 To remember this kanji、 imagine one of these lycanthropes going looney and setting himself up as king of a pack of wild dogs that roams about and terrorizes innocent suburban communities。 ［7］ 掃 掎 
皇	An emperor、 as we all know、 is a ruler—something like a king but higher in status。 The white bird perched above the king、 elevating him to imperial heights、 is the messenger he sends back and forth to the gods to request advice and special favors、 something that white birds have long done in folklore throughout the world。 ［9］ 掛 探 
呈	The trick to remembering this character lies in associating the key word with the line from the nursery rhyme about 4 and 20 blackbirds baked in a pie： “Wasn’t this a dainty dish to set before the king？” If we think of display in terms of that famous line、 and the king with his head thrown back and his mouth wide open as 4 and 20 blackbirds fly in one aft er the other、 we shall have satisfied both the elements and their position。 ［7］ 控 掫 
全	Wholeness suggests physical and spiritual health、 “having your act together。” The kanji－image for wholeness depicts being “king under your own umbrella、” that is、 giving order to your own life。 I know it sounds terribly abstract、 but what could be more abstract than the word whole？ ［6］ 掲 掾 
栓	Here we think of plug in the sense of a cork or stopper used to seal the mouth of a bottle、 water faucet、 or something with liquid running out of it。 Forgetting the abstract picture of the former frame、 let us work with all the primitive units： tree 。 。 。 umbrella 。 。 。 ball。 Imagine a tree with a faucet in the side out of which tennis balls are flowing、 bouncing all over the ground by the hundreds。 You fight your way up to it and shove your giant beach umbrella into the tree to plug it up。 ［10］ 揆 揚 
理	We first referred to this character back in frame 173、 to which you might want to return to have a peek。 The image of logic we are given is something like a central jewel in a computer、 like the jewels in old clocks that keep them running smoothly。 Try to picture yourself making your way through all the rams and roms and approaching this shining jewel、 a chorus of voices and a blast of trumpets in the background heralding the great seat of all－knowing logic。 ［11］ 揩 損 
主	“A man’s home is his castle、” goes the proverb from an age where it was the male who was lord of the household。 Fundamentally、 it means only that every one of us is a bit （or drop） of a king in our own environment。 As for the positioning of the elements、 if you take care to “read off ” the primitives in this way、 you won’t end up putting the drop down below、 where it turns the kanji into a jewel。 ［5］ 挟 振  As a primitive element、 we set the key word aside entirely and take it as a pictograph of a solid brass candlestick （with the drop representing the flame at the top）。 
注	Picture pouring water from a lighted candlestick。 What could be more ridiculous、 or simpler、 as a way to recall this kanji？ ［8］ 搖 搬 
柱	The pillar referred to here is the wooden beam that stands at the entrance to a traditional Japanese house。 Carve it in imagination into the shape of a gigantic candlestick and your work is done。 ［9］ 携 摠 
金	If this were not one of the most common characters you will ever have to write、 I would apologize for having to give the explanation that follows。 Anyway、 we want to depict bars of gold bullion with an umbrella overhead to shade them from the heat （and perhaps to hide them as well）。 The bullion is made by melting down all the scepters of the kingdom、 drop by drop、 and shaping them into bars。 ［8］ 摧 摩 摯 摶 摸 摺 撃 撈  As a primitive、 it means not only gold but any metal at all。 
銑	Pig iron refers to iron in the crude form in which it emerges from the smelting furnaces。 Of all the various forms metal can take、 this one shows us metal before it has been refined。 Imagine two photographs labeled “before” and “aft er” to show the process。 ［14］ 撥 撲 
鉢	Let bowl suggest a large and heavy golden bowl into which you are throwing all the books you own to mash them into pulp、 for some outrageous reason you will have to think up your self。 ［13］ 操 據 
銅	Picture an order of monks serving as chaplains for the police force。 Their special habit、 made of protective metal、 is distinguished by a row of copper buttons just like the “cops” they serve。 ［14］ 擯 擽 
釣	The character we learned for fishing （frame 172） refers to the professional、 net－casting industry、 while the angling of this character refers to the sport。 The odd thing is that your angling rod is a golden ladle which you are using to scoop goldfish out of a river。 ［11］ 攤 攬 
針	In frame 10 we referred ahead to this full character from which the primitive for needle （on the right） derives。 Since we already expect that needles are made of metal、 let us picture a set of solid gold darning needles to complete the kanji。 ［10］ 攻 政 
銘	Take inscription in the sense of the name you ask the jeweler to carve on a gold bracelet or inside a gold ring to identify its owner or communicate some sentimental message。 It will help if you can recall the first time you had this done and the feelings you had at the time。 ［14］ 敖 敢 
鎮	The first lie－detector machines of the twentieth century worked by wiring pieces of metal to the body to measure the amount of sweat produced when questions were asked。 It was discovered that nervousness produced more sweat、 indicating subconscious reactions when the truth was getting too close for comfort。 Nowadays、 people can take drugs that tranquilize them in such a way as to neutralize the eff ect of the device、 which is why other means have had to be developed。 ［18］ 敷 斑  ⻌ road The road envisioned here is a road for traffic、 or a path or walkway。 The natural sweep of these three simple strokes should be easy to remember、 as it appears so oft en。 ［3］ 旡 既 日 
道	The key word carries both the sense of a road for transit and a way or method of doing something、 but the former is better for forming an image。 The primitives read： the neck of a road。 Think of a crowded road－way where traffic has come to a standstill— what we commonly refer to as a “bottleneck。” ［12］ 旻 昀 昂 昃 
導	When we accept someone’s guidance、 we permit ourselves to be glued to a certain road or way of doing something、 and try to “stick” to it。 ［15］ 昞 昤 
辻	Take the first two strokes in the sense we gave them back in frame 10、 as the pictograph of a cross、 and set it on a road to create a “crossing。” ［5］ 昧 昮 
迅	Here we see a crossing in the form of a barbed fishhook、 suggesting a swift er alternate not only to the roundabouts used in Europe but also to the “cloverleaf” design used on superhighways in the United States。 ［6］ 是 昱 昴 昻 
造	Think of creating as making something out of nothing。 Then recall how the way of revelation laid out in the Bible begins with the story of how God created the world out of a dark and chaotic nothingness。 ［10］ 晉 晒 
迫	To urge someone to do something、 you make the way as appealing as possible、 perhaps even whitewashing it a bit。 ［8］ 晟 晥 
逃	When escaping from something or someone、 one always feels as if one is not going fast enough、 like a turtle on an expressway。 （Since the turtle is on the road and not on the left 、 it can keep its full kanji shape as given in frame 235。） ［9］ 景 晴 
辺	To keep the environs clean and safe、 you could cement daggers in the road、 blades pointed upwards、 so that no polluting traffic could pass by。 You could、 if you were an ecologically minded terrorist。 ［5］ 智 暄 
巡	A virtual deluge of motorcycle police washing down a road is this kanji’s image for a patrol。 ［6］  暇 暈 暉 暖 
車	You may keep the whole range of connotations for this key word、 car、 provided it does not interfere with the pictograph。 Look for the front and back wheels （the first and last horizontal strokes） and the seat in the carriage in the middle。 As an exercise、 try to isolate the primitives on your own and make a story out of them。 ［7］ 暗 暘 暙 暝 暠 暢 暦 Car、 cart、 wagon、 and vehicle may all be used as primitive meanings。 
連	What you are meant to take along in this kanji are not things but people。 The image of the car on the road should ground your image for picking up your friends to take them along to wherever you are going。 ［10］ 暼 曁 
軌	Combine the primary and secondary meanings of this key word to form your story。 Begin with the car whose tires get caught in a rut and spin without going anywhere。 Then go on to the baseball team who can’t win a game because it has fallen into a rut of losing。 ［9］ 曜 曠 
輸	On the left we see a vehicle used for transport。 On the right、 we see a new tangle of elements that need sorting out。 The first three strokes、 you will remember、 are the primitive for meeting。 Below it we see the elements for flesh and saber、 which com－ bine to create a compound element for a butcher and his trade。 Together they give us the image of a “trucker’s convoy。” ［16］ 曵 曹 曽 替 
前	We waited to introduce this character until now、 even though we had all the elements、 because it helps to reinforce the odd kanji of the last frame。 Picture the butcher hacking away with his knife at a slab of meat on his table with a pair of ram’s horns placed in front of him （or on his head、 if you prefer）。 There is no need to worry about confusing this kanji with that for before （frame 248）、 since it will not appear as a primitive in any other character used in this book。 ［9］ 最 會 月 朎 朔 
各	“Suum cuique” goes the popular Latin proverb。 A certain disease of the English language makes it almost impossible to translate the phrase without gender bias。 In any event、 here we see someone walking with his／her mouth between his／her walking legs、 giving us an image of “To each his／her own。” ［6］ 望 朝 朞 期 朦 朧  The sense of the proverb should help when using this kanji as a primitive； otherwise、 reduce it to its original elements。 But do not associate it in any way with the word “every、” which we shall meet later in another context。 
格	If you can imagine trees as status symbols （as they might well be for those living in Japan’s congested modern cities、 where greenery has become something of a luxury item）、 then each might be aiming to have his／her own tree、 just to keep up with the Suzukis。 ［10］ 本 朷 
略	Each field has its own abbreviations （chemistry、 philosophy、 sports、 etc。）。 Needless to say、 the ｀stronger｀ primitive—that is to say、 the simpler and more oft en used one—takes the dominant position on the left 、 even though the story would read them off the other way around。 ［11］ 杁 村 
客	When you are a guest in a courteous town、 each household has its own way of welcoming you、 and each house becomes your home。 ［9］ 杙 杢 
額	As Miss Manners will be the first to tell you、 out of respect、 one does not look straight into the eyes of one´s guests、 but focus on the top button of their collar。 Here、 however、 you are told to look above the eyes to the forehead of your guest。 ［18］ 枉 枠 
夏	In the summer、 fatigued by the heat、 your head hangs down nearly as far as your walking legs、 or rather、 your “dragging legs。” Note how the walking legs （instead of “animal legs”） are the only thing that distinguishes this character from that for page （frame 60）。 ［10］ 杣 杤 杯 杲 
処	Both the stretching out of the walking legs and the little bit of wind tucked in on the right suggest using one’s legs to kick something out of the way、 or dispose of it。 ［5］ 枡 枢 枦 枩 枯 
条	Geppetto made walking legs for his little Pinocchio from two twigs of a tree、 giving him a set of “twiggy” shanks。 ［7］ 枳 枴 架 枷 枸 枹 枻 
落	When water falls、 it splishes and splashes； when flower petals fall、 they float gently in the breeze。 To each thing its own way of falling。 ［12］ 柄 柎 柘 
冗	Picture a weather vane beneath a regal crown、 spinning round and round。 It is not only superfluous but makes a perfect ass out of the one who wears it。 ［4］ 柞 柢 
軍	The crowned vehicle depicted here is a “chariot、” symbol of an army。 ［9］ 柯 柱  Used as a primitive this kanji means only chariot。 
輝	Take advantage of the first syllable of the key word to think of the ray of light to the left 。 Now add the glittering chariot that is emitting those rays and you have radiance。 ［15］ 柳 柴 
運	A row of “sweet” chariots “swinging low” to our roads is a sure sign that the Lord is “comin’ for to carry” someone home。 ［12］ 柵 査 
冠	By having the crown pass from one age to the next、 a people keeps itself glued to its beginnings。 ［9］ 柾 柿 栁 
夢	To have a dream aft er going to bed is really the crown to a perfect evening。 The flower petals over the eyes （instead of the “sand” that Westerners are used to finding there when they awake in the morning） only confirms the image of a pleasant dream suggested by the rest of this rather complex kanji。 ［13］ 忻 桍 桎 桐 
坑	A whirlwind begins to dig its way into the soil like a drill until it makes a deep pit。 ［7］ 棚 棟 
高	Recalling an image from frame 183、 first see the mouth under the extraterrestrial’s glass hood、 and then the mouth under the top hat of one of his mates who has tried on the strange earthling’s headgear only to find that it makes him look much、 much taller than everyone else。 ［10］ 桁 桂 桃  As a primitive、 this character keeps its sense of tall and its position at the top of other primitives、 but its writing is abbreviated to the first 5 strokes： 胆。 
享	Tall children receive more attention。 Tall children grow up to make better wide receivers。 Take your pick、 depending on whether you prefer child psychology or American football。 At any rate、 be sure you have some particular tall child in mind、 someone who really was outstanding and always attracting attention、 because he or she will come in handy in the next two frames。 ［8］ 栖 栗 
塾	Cram schools are aft er－hours educational institutions where kids can do concentrated preparing for their coming entrance examinations or drill what they missed during regular class hours。 The exceptions are the tall children who are out on the school grounds practicing sports、 and the fat ones who are out there burning off calories。 So this character depicts those who do not go to the cram schools、 rather than those who do。 ［14］ 栞 校 栢 
熟	The tall and fat children from the last frame are here cast into a cauldron over an oven flame until they have sufficiently mellowed that they can return to the normal life of a student。 ［15］ 柤 柧 柩 
亭	Think of all the pavilions at County Fairs or World Expos you have wandered into or seen advertised in the media、 and you will no doubt see rising up among them the towering tall crowned nail （the crown being a revolving restaurant）—that architectural monstrosity that has become a symbol of science and technology at such events。 ［9］ 栲 栴 核 
京	Think of some tall、 domed capital building with swarms of little folk gathered around its base、 probably demonstrating for their government’s attention。 ［8］ 根 格 
涼	Since few things are as refreshing on a warm day as a cool shower （the water）、 here we picture a capital building treating itself to one、 and in full view of everyone。 ［11］ 栽 桀 
景	Scenery is depicted as a sun rising over a capital、 which is as close as some city dwellers get to natural scenery for years at a time！ ［12］ 棋 棍 
鯨	The whale swallows a whole school of fish、 who turn their new abode into a proper little fish－capital。 ［19］ 棏 棒 
舎	A lidded crock with an umbrella overhead gives us a mixture of the modern and the nostalgic in this design for a cottage。 ［8］ 棗 棘 
周	Look more closely at your lidded crock and you will see little ruler marks along its bottom edge。 This is so you can use it to calculate the circumference of your motorcycle helmet： just begin at a fixed point and turn the lidded crock around and around、 keeping it flush against the side of the helmet、 until you come back to your starting point。 If you kept track of how many turns and part－turns your lidded crock made、 you now know the circumference。 ［8］ 桑 桒 桓 桔  As a primitive、 this character can take the added significance of a lap。 
週	Picture a circular road with 7 markers on it、 one for each day of the week。 When you have walked one complete lap on this road、 you shall have completed one week。 ［11］ 桙 桜 
士	The shape of this kanji、 slightly diff ering from that for soil by virtue of its shorter final stroke、 hints at a broad－shouldered、 slender－waisted warrior standing at attention。 When feudalism collapsed、 these warriors became Japan’s gentlemen。 ［3］ 桝 桟 档 The primitive meaning reverts to the more colorful image of the samurai、 Japan’s warrior class。 
吉	Here we see a samurai standing on a street with an open mouth、 which people walk up to and look down deep inside of for good luck。 ［6］ 桧 桴  As a primitive、 we shall take this shape to mean an aerosol can、 from the mouth and the very tightly－fitting lid （note how it diff ers here from the lidded crock）。 
壮	Robust is seen as a turtle turned samurai。 ［6］ 桶 桷 
荘	The villa pictured here is filled with exotic flowers at every turn、 and has a pair of turtle－samurai standing before its gates。 ［9］ 桾 桿 梁 
売	A samurai、 out of a job、 is going door－to－door selling little windup crowns with human legs that run around on the looking like headless monarchs。 ［7］ 梃 梅 梍 
学	The child in the little red schoolhouse is there for one reason only： to study。 Anyone who has gone through the schooling system knows well enough that study is one thing and learning quite another again。 In the kanji、 too、 the character for learning （frame 574） has nothing to do with the schoolhouse。 ［8］ 條 梟 
覚	The idea of memorizing things is easily related to the schoolhouse； and since we have been at it for more than a hundred pages in this book、 the idea that memorizing involves seeing things that are not really there should make it easy to put the two elements together。 ［12］ 梠 梢 
栄	The botanical connotations of the word flourish （to bud and burst into bloom、 much as a tree does） are part of the ideal of the schoolhouse as well。 ［9］ 梦 梧 
書	The sage talks rapidly with his tongue wagging in his mouth、 while the brush of the scribe runs apace to write down the master’s words。 ［10］ 梵 梶 梹 梺 梼 棄 棊 
津	Seeing the tiny boats of poor mortals tossed about in a stormy sea like so many corks、 the All－Merciful took its brush and drew little inlets of water where the hapless creatures might seek shelter。 And so it is that we have havens。 ［9］ 桄 框 
牧	When it is time to breed new cattle、 the bull is usually willing but the cow is oft en not。 Thus the taskmaster to the right forces the cow into a compromising position、 so to speak、 so that she and her mate can breed。 ［8］ 森 棯 
攻	The special craft of successful taskmasters is their ability to remain constantly on the aggressive、 never allowing their underlings a moment to ponder a counter－aggression。 ［7］ 棲 棹 
敗	The taskmaster is acknowledging the failure of a clam to make the grade in some marine school or other。 ［11］ 椀 椁 
枚	English counts thin、 flat objects、 like bed linen and paper、 in sheets。 The kanji does this with a taskmaster whipping a tree into producing sheets against its will。 ［8］ 椋 椌 
故	Call it fate or providence or plain old Lady Luck、 happenstance is the oldest taskmaster we know。 It nearly always has its way。 ［9］ 検 椡 
敬	Standing in awe of someone、 you get self－conscious and may try to speak in flowery phrases out of veneration or fear。 The task master at the right is drilling you in the practice of your “honorifics。” ［12］ 椹 椽 椿 
言	Of all the things we can do with our mouth、 speech requires the greatest distinctness and clarity。 Hence the kanji for say has four little sound－waves、 to show the complexity of the task。 ［7］ 楊 楓 楔 楕 楙 楚 楜  This kanji、 which appears oft en as a primitive、 can mean saying、 speech、 or words、 depending on which is most useful。 
警	Here you have a perfect example of how an apparently impossible snarl of strokes becomes a snap to learn once you know its elements。 The idea of being admonished for something already sets up a superior－inferior relationship between you and the person you are supposed to stand in awe of。 While you are restricted to answering in honorifics、 the superior can use straightforward and ordinary words。 ［19］ 楝 楞 
計	Words and a meter’s needle combine to form the sense of plot： to talk over plans and to calculate a course of action。 ［9］ 楠 楡 
獄	Although we did not make note of it at the time、 the kanji for dog is also a low－grade term for a spy。 And later （frame 1414） we will meet another association of criminals with dogs。 The prison here depicts a pack of wild dogs （the long－timers and hardened criminals） into which the poor little chihuahua （firstoff ender） has been cast。 The only thing he has to protect himself against the pack are his shrill and frightened words。 ［14］ 楢 楨 楪 
訂	After completing the first draft 、 you revise it by nailing down your words and “hammering” them into shape。 ［9］ 楫 業 
討	Words spoken to chastise us stick to us like glue in a way no other words can。 ［10］ 楮 楯 
訓	The personalism connoted by the word instruction、 as opposed to “teaching” or “discipline、” suits the picture here of words guiding one’s progress like the gentle flowing of a stream。 Even the etymology of the word instruction suggests the sense of “pouring into”。 ［10］ 楳 楴 
詔	The imperial edict、 spoken with the force of unquestionable law、 is made up of words intended to seduce the masses—be it through fear or respect—to follow obediently。 ［12］ 極 楷 
詰	A piece of writing that is pregnant with meaning and needs to be reread several times to be understood we refer to colloquially as “packed。” The character sees the words as sealed tightly inside an aerosol can。 ［13］ 楸 楹 
話	That the words of the tongue should come to mean a tale is clear from the etymology： a tale is something “talked、” not something read from a book。 ［13］ 楼 楽 
詠	Listening to the words of poets reciting their poetry is like being transported for a moment into eternity where the rules of everyday life have been suspended。 ［12］ 楾 榁 
詩	Since silence is treasured so highly at a Buddhist temple the words spoken there must be well chosen。 Perhaps this is why the records of the monks oft en read to us like poems。 Before going on、 back up a frame and make sure you have kept poem and recitation distinct in your mind。 ［13］ 概 榊 
語	Whereas the character for say focused on the actual talking、 the kanji for words stresses the fact that although it is I who say them、 the words of a language are not my own。 You can see the clear distinction between I and words just by looking at the kanji。 ［14］ 榎 榑 
読	In the age of advertising、 most words we read are out to sell some product or point of view。 ［14］ 榔 榕 
調	A complete tune is composed not only of a succession of notes but also of one lap of the words that go with it。 ［15］ 榘 榛 
談	In almost every attempt to discuss an issue、 the fervor of one’s convictions comes to the surface and creates an inflammation of words （if you will、 the “cuss” in discuss）。 ［15］ 榜 榠 
諾	The words of the young do not have legal validity unless backed up by “parental consent。” ［15］ 榧 榮 
諭	The stern tone of a rebuke is seen here in the image of words spoken at a meeting of butchers （see frame 289） waving their choppers at one another and “cutting one another down” as only butchers can。 ［16］ 榱 榲 
式	Take style in its sense of some fashion design or model。 Then let the element arrow and craft stand for the well－known style of shirts known as “Arrow shirts” because of the little arrow sewn on each one。 ［6］ 榿 槁 槃 
試	When a manufacturer produces a new style for the market、 the first thing that is done is to run a test on consumers、 asking them to speak their opinions frankly about the product。 Never mind the anachronism （the kanji was there well before our capitalistic market system） if it helps you remember。 ［13］ 槎 槐 
弐	 We use the Roman numeral ii here to stress that this kanji is an older form of the kanji for two。 Think of two arrows in a quiver、 standing up like the numeral ii。 ［6］ 槞 槢 槧 槨 槫 槭 
域	From its original meaning of a defined area or zone、 a range has also come to mean a grazing land where cowboys roam and do whatever it is they do with cows。 When the herds have all been driven to market、 there is a great homecoming fiesta like that pictured here。 As soon as the cowboys come home、 home on the range、 the first thing they do is kiss the ground （the mouth on the ）、 and then get on with the fiesta。 ［11］ 棺 槲 槹 槻 槽 
賊	From a burglar’s point of view、 a fiesta is an occasion to take out the old lockpicking needle and break into the unattended safe filled with the family shells （the old form of money、 as we saw in frames 80 and 194）。 ［13］ 槿 樀 樁 樂 
栽	On a fruit plantation it is the trees that one is particularly grateful for at the time of Thanksgiving。 Imagine yourself inviting a few representative trees from the fields and orchards to join you around the table to give thanks。 ［10］ 樔 樗 標 
載	One loads bales on a wagon or cart in preparation for the great Hay Ride that follows the Thanksgiving dinner each year。 ［13］ 樣 権 横 
茂	The sense of the key word overgrown is of something growing luxuriously、 though not necessarily in excess—in this case a whole parade of weeds （outcaste flowers）。 By way of exception、 the flowers take their normal place over the enclosure。 ［8］ 樫 樮 
成	Let the phrase “turn into” suggest some sort of a magical change。 What happens here is that the parade marching down main street turns into a dagger－throwing bout between competing bands。 Note how only one stroke has to be added to make the change。 ［6］ 樰 樵 樶 樸 樹 樺 
城	In this frame、 we see a mound of dirt that is being turned into a castle （the way you may have done as a child playing on the beach）。 ［9］ 樽 橄 
誠	The sure sign of sincerity is that one’s mere words are turned into deeds。 ［13］ 橆 橇 
威	Here we see a march of women demonstrating on behalf of equal rights、 something extremely intimidating to the male chauvinist population。 ［9］ 橢 橦 橫 
滅	Picture a march of flames demonstrating against the Fire Department for their right to destroy、 but being doused with water by the police riot squads。 ［13］  橲 橳 橸 橾 
減	A group of unquenchable mouths sets out on a march across the country、 drinking water wherever they can find it until the water supply has dwindled to a trickle、 triggering a national disaster。 ［12］ 槊 構 槌 槍 
桟	Prior to the use of metal、 trees were once cut down and bound together for use as scaff olding material。 In the case of the kanji shown here、 what is being constructed is not a skyscraper but a simple float。 ［10］ 橿 檀 
銭	Those special gold－colored tokens minted each year for the Mardi Gras and thrown into the crowds from people on the floats give us the kanji for coins。 ［14］ 檄 檍 
浅	An entourage of floats going from one town to the next must always seek a shallow place to cross the water。 Try to picture what happens if they don’t。 ［9］ 檎 檐 
止	The character for stop is easiest to learn as a pictograph、 though you have to take a moment to see it。 Take it as a rather crude drawing of a footprint： the first 3 strokes represent the front of the foot and the last the heel。 The big toe （stroke 2 sticking out to the right） on the right indicates that this is a left foot。 ［4］ 檗 檜 檠 檢  Although the meaning of stop will be retained、we will return oft en to the pictographic meaning of footprint。 
歩	Footprints that follow one another a few at a time indicate walking。 ［8］ 檣 檪 檬 檮 檳 檸 檻 櫁 
渉	To ford a body of water means to walk across it。 ［11］ 櫂 櫃 櫑 
頻	The image of something occurring repeatedly、 over and over again、 is of having one’s head walked on。 ［17］ 櫓 櫚 
肯	Seeing footprints on someone’s flesh indicates a rather brutal way of having secured that person’s agreement。 ［8］ 櫪 櫺 
企	To undertake a project is to take some idea floating in the air and stop it so that it can be brought down to earth and become a reality。 Here we see some undertaking made to stop under a beach umbrella。 ［6］ 櫻 欄 欅 權 欒 欖 
歴	That same grove of trees we met in frame 213 shows up here in the character for curriculum （in the sense of a record of one’s life or academic achievements、 the curriculum vitae）。 Instead of the grove making its way slowly through the surface of the cliff as before、 here we see it stopped、 much the same as a curriculum vitae calls a halt to the calendar and talks only about the past。 ［14］ 欝 欟 欠 
武	With a quiver of arrows set on one’s back、 the goal of the warrior depicted here is not to attack but merely to stop the attack of others： the oldest excuse in history！ ［8］ 次 欣 欧 欲 欷 欸 欹 欺 
賦	A certain portion of shells （money） is collected by the warrior from the local villages as he passes through to defray the costs of keeping the land safe、 and this is called a levy。 ［15］ 欽 款 
正	“A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step、” says the Chinese proverb。 Here we see one footprint、 complementing that proverb with the sound advice that if the first step is not made correctly、 the whole point of the journey will be forfeited。 This is the ideal that teachers are supposed to have in correcting their students、 and parents in correcting their children。 ［5］ 歃 歇 歉 歌 歎 
証	Words that testify to the correctness of some fact are classified as evidence。 （Here we see a good example of how the more common primitive element takes the “strong” position to the left 、 even though it has more strokes。） ［12］ 歐 歓 
政	To the many definitions for politics that already exist、 this character off ers yet another： correct taskmastering。 Think about what 
定	Determination、 in the sense of settling on a certain course of action、 is likened here to mending one’s house。 ［8］ 此 武 
錠	Metal of itself doesn’t lock。 It needs to be so determined by a locksmith。 Now make a concrete image of that。 ［16］ 歩 歪 
走	Running、 we are told here、 mends the soil。 Observe in the following frames how this kanji can embrace other elements from below、 much the same way as the element for road does。 Note、 too、 that in order to do this、 the final stroke needs to be lengthened。 ［7］ 歯 歳 
超	When one is running aft er something、 the goal that seduces one is said to transcend the seeker。 ［12］ 歴 歸 
赴	In proceeding to a new city or a new job、 something in you runs ahead with excitement、 and something else holds you back、 like a divining rod built into your psyche warning you to check things out carefully before rushing in too wildly。 ［9］ 歹 死 
越	Here we see two parades in competition、 each trying to surpass the other by running at high speed from one town to the next。 Note the little “hook” at the end of the first stroke of the element for parade。 This is the only time it appears like this in the kanji treated in this book。 ［12］ 歿 殀 
是	In this kanji we are shown someone spending an entire day at mending one stocking、 because they want the job done “just so。” Be sure to make a clear image of a finicky old fusspot to make the abstract idea as concrete as possible。 ［9］ 殃 殄 
題	In many kinds of research、 one can find information on a given topic only if the headings are prepared just so。 ［18］ 殆 殉 
堤	A dike is a successful bit of engineering only if the amount of earth piled up is measured just so for the height and pressure of the water it is meant to contain。 ［12］ 殊 残 
建	To construct a building、 you first draw a set of plans （the writing brush） and then s－t－r－e－t－c－h your drawing out to scale in reality。 ［9］ 殘 殞 
延	This character is a kind of pictographic image of how prolonging is a clever way of stopping things by trying to stretch them out a little bit at a time （the extra drop at the top of stop）。 Be sure to get a concrete image of this process、 by imagining yourself prolonging something you can really、 physically、 stretch。 ［8］ 殤 殪 
誕	The key word of course calls to mind the feast of Christmas。 As the famous poem at the start of St。 John’s gospel tells us、 the nativity we celebrate at Christmas had its origins at the very start of time and governs all of human history： it represents the prolongation of the eternal Word in time and space。 ［15］ 殫 殯 
礎	This character depicts a cornerstone as a stone set at the end of a wildlife preserve （the “zoo in the grove”）。 ［18］ 殷 殺 殻 
婿	What makes a man a bridegroom is obviously a woman and her dowry、 here presented as a small zoo （animals were oft en used for this purpose in earlier societies） and a month away from it all （the “honeymoon”）。 ［12］ 殼 殿 毀 
衣	At the top we see the top hat、 and at the bottom a pictographic representation of the folds of a garment。 If you break the “4－fold” fold into 2 sets of 2 strokes、 you will find it easier to remember。 ［6］ 毅 毆 毋 母 毎 毒  Used as a primitive、 the additional meanings of cloak or scarf will come in handy。 What has to be noted particularly are the changes in shape the kanji can undergo when it becomes an element in other kanji。 In fact、 it is the most volatile of all the kanji we shall treat、 and for that reason deserves special attention here。 When it appears to the left 、 it looks like this： 衤、 and we shall take it to mean cloak。 At the bottom、 when attached to the stroke immediately above it、 the first two strokes （the top hat） are omitted、 giving us： 背、 which we shall take to mean a scarf。 On rare occasions、 the element can be torn right across the middle、 with the first 2 strokes appearing at the top and the last 4 at the bottom of another primitive or cluster of primitives： 胎、 in which cases we shall speak of a top hat and scarf。 And finally、 of course、 it can keep its original kanji shape、 along with its original meaning of garment in general。 Note that when any of the above forms have something beneath them （as in frame 402）、 the third from final stroke is “unhooked、” like this： 胖。 
裁	You might think here of garments that have been specially tailored for Thanks giving celebrations to look like traditional Pilgrim garb。 ［12］ 毓 比 毖 毘 毛 
装	The character for attire can be remembered as a picture of what we may call a “turtle－samurai” sweater。 At the top we see the turtle－samurai and at the bottom the element for garment。 ［12］ 毟 毫 毬 
裏	An innocent looking top hat and scarf lying there in front of you、 turned over、 reveal a hidden computer sewn into the back of each—obviously the tools of a master spy。 Such experiences teach one always to have a look at the back side of things。 ［13］ 毯 毳 氈 
壊	The right half of this character shows a garment woven so fine that it can pass through the eye of a needle、 fittingly draped around the slithering、 ethereal form of a poltergeist。 In this frame、 our eerie visitor brushes its robes against a nearby block of apartments and completely demolishes them、 razing them to the ground。 ［16］ 氏 民 氓 
哀	A drunken sod in a tattered top hat and soiled silk scarf with a giant mouth guzzling something or other gives us a pathetic character role in which W。 C。 Fields might find himself right at home。 ［9］ 气 気 氛 
遠	A distant figure on the road is such a blur it looks like a lidded crock wearing a silk scarf。 ［13］ 氣 氤 水 
猿	This clever little monkey has captured an entire pack of wild dogs、 locked them inside a lidded crock、 and wrapped the whole thing up in a silk scarf to present to the dogcatcher。 ［13］ 氷 永 氾 
初	The primitives here take care of themselves： cloak and dagger。 What I leave to you is to decide on an appropriate connotation for “first time” to take advantage of them。 ［7］ 氿汀 汁 求 汊 汋 
布	The maid、 towels by her side、 distributes the linen。 ［5］ 汐 汕 汗 
帆	A sail made of a towel makes a mediocre vessel。 ［6］ 汜 汚 
幅	A towel owned by the wealthiest tycoon in the world is made into a hanging scroll aft er his death and auctioned off to the highest bidder。 ［12］ 汜 汝 
帽	Because of the risk involved （of getting the sun in one’s eyes）、 one puts together a makeshift cap out of a dirty old towel。 ［12］ 汞 江 池 
幕	A dirty towel draped over the entrance to the old graveyard is painted to look like the curtain of death that leads to the other world。 ［13］ 汢 汨 
幌	A large towel stretched overhead with only a few of the sun’s rays breaking through represents a canopy over one’s bed。 ［13］ 濆 濔 濕 
錦	A strip of white towel and some scraps of metal have the makings of a primitive kind of brocade。 ［16］ 汪 汯 汰 
市	Dressed in nothing but a bath towel and top hat、 one sets off to the marketplace in search of a bargain or two。 ［5］ 汲 汳 決 汽 汾 
姉	Of all the women of the family、 it is the elder sister who has the duty to go to market to do the shopping。 ［8］ 沁 沂 
肺	One is surprised、 strolling through the market、 to find among the meats hung out for sale a slab marked： lungs。 ［9］ 沃 沆 
帯	The part of the apron where one finds the buckle （represented pictorially by the first 5 strokes） is on the sash。 ［10］ 沍 沐 沒 沓 沖 沙 沚 
滞	People that have been “sashed” to something （whether their mother’s apron strings or a particular job） for too long become like water that has stopped moving： they start to stagnate。 ［13］ 沛 没 
刺	Thorns grow on a bush here that has wrapped itself around a tree like a belt、 cutting into the poor tree like little sabers。 ［8］ 沮 沱 河 沸 油 沺 治 沼 
制	This kanji show a unique system for leading cows to the slaughterer’s saber： one ties a belt about their waist and fixes that belt to an overhead cable、 pulling the cow up into the air where it hangs suspended、 helpless against the fate that awaits it。 ［8］ 沽 沾 沿 況 泄 泅 泉 泊 
製	</br>A label indicating that a garment was made in u。s。a。 or Taiwan or Japan is itself a symbol for the systematization of the garment industry。 ［14］ 泌 泓 
転	As the wheels of the car revolve、 they kick up small rising clouds of dust and debris behind them。 ［11］ 泛 泝 
芸	The secret technique of making a rising cloud of smoke turn into a bouquet of flowers is shown here。 ［7］ 泡 波 
雨	This kanji、 also a primitive、 is one of the clearest instances we have of a complex pictograph。 The top line is the sky、 the next 3 strokes a pair of clouds、 and the final 4 dots the rain collected there and waiting to fall。 ［8］ 泣 泥 注 泪 泯 泰 泱 泳  As a primitive it can mean either rain or weather in general。 Because it takes so much space、 it usually has to be contracted into a crown by shortening the second and third strokes into a crown like this： 胙。 
雲	Here is the full character for cloud from which the primitive for a rising cloud derives。 Clouds begin with vapors rising up in small clouds from the surface of the earth、 and then gathering to make clouds that eventually dump their rain back on the earth。 ［12］ 洄 洋 
曇	We refer to days when the sun is covered by the clouds as cloudy weather。 ［16］ 洌 洒 
雷	The full rumble and roar and terror of thunder is best felt not with your head tucked under your pillow safe in bed、 but out in an open rice field where you can get the real feel of the weather。 ［13］ 洗 洙 
霜	Think of frost as a cooperative venture、 an inter－action of the malevolent forces of weather that sit around a conference table and finally decide to allow a very light amount of moisture to fall just before a short and sudden freeze。 ［17］ 洛 洞 
冬	Walking legs slipping on the ice are a sure sign of winter。 ［5］ 洩 洪 
天	This character is meant to be a pictograph of a great man、 said to represent the Lord of the Heavens。 （You may、 of course、 use the elements ceiling and St。 Bernard instead。） ［4］ 洫 洲 洳 洵  The primitive can mean either the heaven of eternal bliss or the general term for sky、the heavens。 Pay special attention to the fact that in its primitive form the first stroke is written right to left 、 rather like the first stroke of thousand （frame 40）、 rather than left to right、 giving us： 夭。 
橋	The bridge shown here is made of trees in their natural form、 except that the trunks have been carved into the forms of angels、 a sort of “Ponte degli Angeli。” ［16］ 活 洽 
嬌	Associating a particularly attractive woman you know with an angel should be no problem。 ［15］ 派 流 
立	This picture of a vase standing up has its meaning extended to represent the general posture of anything standing up。 ［5］ 浄 浅 浙 浚 浜  Used as a primitive、 it can also mean vase。 Using its kanji meaning、 think of something standing up that is normally lying down、 or something standing up in an unusual way。 
泣	One cries and cries until one is standing up knee－deep in water （or until one has a vase－full of water）。 ［8］ 浣 浤 
章	Try to imagine a club badge pinned to your lapel in the form of a mammoth sunflower protruding from a wee little vase。 ［11］ 浦 浩 
競	Two teenagers are seen here standing up to one another、 vying for the attention of their peers。 ［20］ 浪 浬 浮 
帝	An uncommon、 but not altogether unlikely picture of a reigning sovereign has him standing up in his apron、 presumably at the behest of his sovereign （she who is to be obeyed）、 who needs help with washing the dishes。 ［9］ 浯 浴 海 
童	This frame shows up the image of a juvenile hacker standing on top of a computer、 or rather jumping up and down on it、 because it refused to come up with the right answer。 ［12］ 浸 浹 
瞳	Begin with the double meaning of the key word pupil： “student” and the “apple of one’s eye。” Now all you have to do is dwell on the phrase “juvenile of one’s eye” （the meaning here） until it provides you with an image。 ［17］  涅 涇 
鐘	This bell is made of cheap metal、 and so badly made that when you ring it、 it lets out a noise like the “bellowing” of juveniles who aren’t getting their own way。 ［20］ 消 涌 
商	See the peddler standing atop his motorcycle helmet as if it were a soapbox、 hawking his wares to passersby。 The legs and mouth represent the tools of the trade of making a deal any way you can。 ［11］ 涎 涓 涕 涖 
嫡	The phrase legitimate wife would have no meaning if there were not such things as “illegitimate wives、” taken because one’s legal woman has turned into an antique。 The very off ense of the idea should help you remember the kanji。 ［14］ 涬 涯 
適	Can you imagine anything less suitable to do with one’s precious antiques than to display them in the middle of a crowded road－way？ ［14］ 液 涵 
滴	Picture water dripping on what you thought were precious antiques、 only to find that the artificial aging painted on them is running！ ［14］ 涸 涼 
敵	Picture your most precious antique （it doesn’t matter how old it really is、 so long as it is the oldest thing you own） being knocked over by your most unlikable taskmaster、 and you have a good picture of how people make themselves enemies for life。 ［15］ 淀 淅 
匕	This character、 a pictograph of a spoon、 is easy enough to remember、 provided you keep it distinct from that for seven、 where the first stroke is written left to right （the opposite of here） and cuts noticeably across the second。 ［2］ 淆 淇  As a primitive、 this kanji can take on the additional meaning of someone sitting on the ground、 of which it can also be considered a pictograph。 In this case、 the second stroke does not cut through the first at all、 as in the following frame。 
北	The cold air from the north is so strong that we see two people sitting on the ground back to back、 their arms interlocked so they don’t blow away。 （Pay special attention to the drawing of the first 3 strokes。） ［5］  淋 淌 淏 淑 淒 
背	One’s stature is measured according to the “northern－most” part of the body。 ［9］ 淕 淘 
比	With two spoons、 one in each hand、 you are comparing your mother’s cooking with your mother－in－law’s。 ［4］ 淙 淞 淟 
昆	By comparing apes with anthropoids、 we not only discover the latter have descended from those progenitors educated in the higher branches、 but that the very idea of seeing everything descended from everything else、 one way or another、 means that there is “nothing new under the sun。” ［8］ 淡 淤 
皆	Think of the housewives in tv commercials “comparing the whiteness” of their laundry across the fence、 a typical advertisement for the popular detergent known as All。 （If you don’t know the brand、 surely you’ve heard the phrases “all－purpose detergent” or “all－temperature detergent。”） ［9］ 淦 淨 
混	Mixed marriages、 this character suggests、 water down the quality of one’s descendants—the oldest racial nonsense in the world！ ［11］ 濟 濠 
渇	As you pass by the muchacho taking the siesta、 he cries out that he is thirsty and asks for something to drink。 So you turn the water hose on him。 ［11］ 淮 深 
謁	Imagine an audience with the emperor or the pope in which all those in attendance are sitting down、 leaning against the wall、 sleeping like our muchacho on siesta、 as the honorable host delivers his speech。 ［15］ 淲 淳 
褐	The color of the serape or cloak of our muchacho on siesta is a dull brown、 the color this kanji indicates。 ［13］ 淵 混 
喝	When the muchacho on siesta looks up and opens his mouth to talk、 his voice is so hoarse you cannot understand him。 ［11］  淸 淹 
旨	Something is so downright delicious that one spends the entire day with a spoon in hand gobbling it up。 ［6］ 淺 添 
脂	This kanji tells us that if you feed the flesh with too many delicious things、 it soon picks up a thick layer of fat。 ［10］ 淼 清 
壱	The Roman numeral i—like that for ii we met earlier in frame 355—is only rarely used now。 In the midst of all the samurai、 we notice one in particular sitting on the ground with a crown on his head、 indicating that he is “number i” in the current rankings。 ［7］ 渇 済 渉 
毎	“Behind every successful person lies a woman…、” who usually turns out to be one’s mama！ ［6］ 渊 渋 
敏	Behind every successful taskmaster、 the cleverness of a fox to outwit his charges。 ［10］ 渓 渕 
梅	Behind every Jack Horner’s pie maker、 a tree full of plums。 ［10］ 渙 渚 
海	Behind every drop of water、 a sea from which it originated。 ［9］ 減 渝 
乞	See someone lying down in a public place with a hook in place of a hand、 begging a morsel of rice or a few pence。 ［3］ 渟 渠 
乾	In times of drought anything at all will do。 Here we see the victims begging for just a little mist for relief。 ［11］ 渡 渣 
腹	If you double back （fold over） most animals—or people、 for that matter—in the middle、 the part of the body where the crease comes is the abdomen。 ［13］ 渫 測 
複	In its original and etymologically transparent sense、 to duplicate something means to double it back with a fold、 like the fold of a cloak。 ［14］ 渭 渮 
欠	The pictograph hidden in this character is of someone yawning。 The first stroke shows the head thrown back； the second、 the arm bent at the elbow as the hand reaches up to cover the mouth； and the last two、 the legs。 Since yawning shows a lack of something （psychologically、 interest； physiologically、 sleep）、 the connection is plain to see。 ［4］ 港 游 渹 渺  When used as a primitive element、 this kanji can mean either yawn or lack。 
吹	To blow is really no more than a deliberate eff ort to make one’s mouth lack all the air that is in it。 ［7］ 渼 渾 
炊	Better to picture what happens when you do not pay attention to your work in the kitchen。 Here we see a blazing fire and an inattentive、 yawning cook who let things get out of control。 ［8］ 湃 湊 
歌	The song in this kanji is being sung by a chorus line of can－can girls。 Why it should be eliciting nothing but yawning from the audience、 I leave to you to decide。 ［14］ 濘 濛 
軟	If the cushions of one’s car are too soft、 one may begin yawning at the wheel。 ［11］ 湍 湎 
次	This key word connotes the “next in line” of a succession of people or things。 Let there be a lack of ice on the hottest day of summer、 and you stand impatiently in line waiting for the distributor to call out “Next！” ［6］ 湖 湘  As a primitive、 this character can either retain its key word meaning of next or the related meaning of second。 
茨	Earlier we made mention of the story of Briar Rose （or “Sleeping Beauty、” as we called her in frame 154） and drew attention to the briar hedge that grew up all about her castle。 But in the second part of the story、 these briars blossomed into flowers。 Hence her name、 Briar Rose。 Be careful not to confuse this character with that for thorn （frame 417）。 ［9］ 湛 湜 
資	The first shells （money） you earn、 you use to pay your debts。 From then on、 the next shells you accumulate become your assets。 ［13］ 湟 湧 
姿	This kanji depicts a woman’s figure as a sort of second self。 ［9］ 湫 湮 
諮	To seek the words of a second mouth is to consult with someone about something。 ［16］ 湯 湲 湶 
賠	Picture a clam used as a muzzle to quiet the complaints of a fisherman’s widow asking compensation for her husband lost at sea。 ［15］ 満 溂 
培	The barrel hoops used by many Japanese farmers to stretch clear plastic over row of vegetables in a garden patch in the hopes of cultivating bigger and bigger vegetables is a way of muzzling the soil。 ［11］ 溌 溏 
剖	To “divide and conquer” you use a saber and a muzzle。 ［10］ 源 準 
音	The kanji for sound depicts something standing in the air over a tongue wagging in a mouth、 much the same as a sound does for the briefest of moments before disappearing。 ［9］ 溘 溜  The primitive from this kanji also means simply a sound。
暗	When “darkness covered the earth” at the beginning of time、 there was neither sun nor sound。 ［13］ 溝 溟 
韻	Poetry restricted to verses that rhyme oft en finds it has to abandon clarity of thought in order to make the rhyme of the words work。 In this kanji’s picture、 one becomes a kind of “soundemployee。” ［19］ 溢 溥  ┷ kazoo This primitive’s special usefulness lies not in its frequency but in its simplification of a few otherwise difficult kanji。 It pictures the sound of a fiesta、 namely a kazoo。 Note how the element for sound is written first、 the fifth stroke extended so that it can be used in the element for fiesta。 ［12］ 溶 溷 滂 滉 
識	A person of discriminating intellect can tell the diff erence between mere kazoo－buzzing and words spoken wisely。 ［19］ 滋 滌 
鏡	After lakes but before glass、 polished metal was used for mirrors。 These metal mirrors are recalled in this character for a mirror。 ［19］ 滔 滕 
境	Imagine the boundary of a plot of land marked with gigantic mirrors enabling the landowner to keep trespassers in sight at all times。 ［14］ 滝 滞 
亡	A top hat hanging on a hook in the front hall、 right where the deceased left it the day he died、 reminds us of him and his kanji。 ［3］ 滬 滯 In addition to deceased、 the primitive meaning of to perish will also be used for this character。 
盲	If one’s eyes perish before death、 one remains blind for the rest of life。 ［8］ 滲 滴 
妄	The “ideal woman” one daydreams about is no more than a delusion。 Hence、 perish the thought of her。 ［6］ 滷 滸 
荒	The flowers that perish in the flood are taken here as symbols of an area that has been laid waste。 ［9］ 滾 滿 漁 
望	The story of ambition talks of a king walking under the perishing （or “waning”） moon dreaming great dreams about his kingdom。 （The roots of ambition are from the same word as “ambulate、” meaning to walk about。） ［11］ 漂 漆 漉 
方	Spinning a dagger about on its hilt on the top of a top hat— waiting to see in which direction it points when it comes to rest—one leaves to fate where one is going next。 Take care in writing this character。 ［4］ 漏 漑 澂  As a primitive、 this character will take the sense of a compass、 the instrument used to determine direction。 
妨	Imagine a compass that is disturbed every time a woman passes by、 sending the needle spinning madly round and round。 ［7］ 漓 演 
坊	The character for a boy shows us a Boy Scout cleaning the dirt out of his compass—the more dirt、 the better。 ［7］ 漕 漠 
芳	Here we see a special compass used to pick out those flowers most suited for making good perfumes。 ［7］ 漢 漣 
肪	If you eat too much、 you may need a compass to find your way around the obese mass of flesh that piles up in your midsection。 Compare this with the stories for round （frame 44） and fat （frame 456）、 similar in meaning but distinct in imagery。 ［8］ 漫 漬 
訪	When making a courtesy call on a dignitary、 one has to gauge one’s words with great care。 Hence the need for a compass。 ［11］ 漱 漲 
放	The taskmaster sets an unruly servant free、 giving him no more than a quick glance at the compass and a boot from behind。 ［8］ 漸 漾 
激	Some cosmic taskmaster hovering overhead whips up the waves to make them dash violently against the shore。 In the white foam that covers the water we see a broken compass floating、 all that remains of a shipwreck。 ［16］ 漿 潁 潅 潔 
脱	To undress is to expose the flesh and tempt the devil in the eyes of one’s onlookers。 Ignore the moral if you want、 but not the devil。 ［11］ 潜 潟 
説	Not inappropriately、 this character likens an explanation to the devil’s own words。 ［14］ 潤 潦 
鋭	Metal that has been pointed （as an awl、 a pick、 a nail、 or a knife） tends to serve the devil’s purposes as well as civilization’s： our tools are also our weapons。 ［15］ 潭 潮 
曽	This primitive （named for its associations with the kanji of the following frame） is composed of a pair of horns growing out of a brain with a tongue wagging in the mouth beneath。 Think of “former” in connection with administrators or heads of state who have just left office but continue to make a nuisance of themselves by advertising their opinions on public policy。 ［11］ 潯 潰 潴 The primitive meaning、increase、 comes from the next frame。 Always think of something multiplying wildly as you watch。 
増	This kanji depicts an increase of soil、 multiplying so fast that it literally buries everything in its path。 ［14］ 潸 潺 
贈	The presents off ered here are money that increases each time you give it away。 Do not confuse with the temporal word “present” （frame 259）。 ［18］ 潼 澀 
東	As a “Western” language、 English identifies the east with the rising sun。 In more fanciful terms、 we see the sun piercing through a tree as it rises in the east。 ［8］ 澄 澆 澈 澎 澑 澗 澡 澣  Both the direction east and the part of the world called “the East” are primitive meanings of this character。 
棟	If the piece of wood in the roof known as the ridgepole points east、 the sunrise will be visible from the front door。 ［12］ 澤 澪 
凍	The whole secret to breaking the ice with the East is to peek behind those mysteriously “frozen smiles。” ［10］  澱 澳 
妊	A woman who is in her pregnancy is a bit like a porter、 bearing her new companion wherever she goes。 ［7］ 激 濁 
廷	Those who rule the courts、 the porters of justice and order、 are oft en found to stretch the law to suit their own purposes。 Recall the kanji for prolong from frame 392 and keep it distinct。 ［7］ 濂 濃 part three Elements We come now to the third major step in our study of the kanji： the invention of plots from primitive elements。 From now on、 the ordering of the remaining characters according to their primitives will be taken care of、 but the reader will be required to do most of the work。 As before、 particularly difficult kanji will be supplied with supplementary hints、 plots、 or even whole stories。 You should now have a feel for the way details can be worked into a kanji story so as to create a more vivid ambience for the primitive elements to interact。 What may be more difficult is experimenting with plots and discarding them until the simplest one is fixed on、 and then embellished and nuanced。 You may find it helpful occasionally to study some of the earlier stories that you found especially impressive、 in order to discover precisely why they struck you、 and then to imitate their vitality in the stories you will now be inventing。 Equally helpful will be any attention you give to those characters whose stories you have found it difficult to remember、 or have easily confused with those of other characters。 As you progress through this final section、 you may wish even to return and amend some of those earlier stories。 But do it with the knowledge that once a story has been learned、 it is generally better to review it and perhaps repair it slightly than to discard it entirely and start over。 
染	Water 。 。 。 nine 。 。 。 tree。 From those elements you must compose a plot for the key word、 dye。 Here、 as elsewhere、 any of the alternate meanings of the primitives may be used、 provided they do not require a position other than that of the kanji in question。 ［9］  濮 濯 濱 
燃	Hearth 。 。 。 sort of thing。 Beware of letting the simple reading off of the primitive elements do your work for you。 Unless you make a vivid image of something burning and relate it just as vividly to those primitive meanings、 you can count on forgetting this character very quickly。 ［16］ 濳 濵 
賓	 The v。i。p。 indicated here is an important guest making a visit。 The elements are： house 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 few 。 。 。 shells。 ［15］ 濶 濺 濾 瀁 
歳	Stop 。 。 。 march 。 。 。 little。 Be sure not to forget that final dot in the element for march。 ［13］ 瀅 瀇 瀉 瀋 
県	Above、 an eye and a fishhook、 and below the primitive for little。 Although apparently the simplest of these first six kanji、 when you begin to work on its plot and story you will soon find out that the number of strokes and visual complexity of a kanji does not make it easier or harder to remember。 It is the primitives you have to work that are the critical factor、 as in this case where the meaning of the key word is so seemingly distant from the elements。 Remember、 you can always break larger elements down （eye of a needle into eye and fishhook） if you think it helps。 ［9］ 瀏 瀑 
栃	A tree 。 。 。 cliff 。 。 。 ten thousand。 ［9］ 瀕 瀘 瀚 
地	Soil and a scorpion （an “earth animal”）。 This is、 of course、 the full character from which the primitive for ground derives。 ［6］ 瀟 瀦 
池	Water 。 。 。 scorpion。 It would be easy to slip into a “lazy image” in cases like this one、 picturing、 let us say、 a scorpion near the water。 But if you picture rather a scorpion letting its venom out drop by drop until it has made a whole pond of the stuff 、 the image is more likely to remain fixed。 ［6］ 瀧 瀨 
虫	Work with the pictograph as you wish。 ［6］ 瀬 瀰 瀲 瀾  As a primitive、 this insect will refer to the whole insect kingdom；、 it can be specified for each kanji that contains it。－ 
蛍	Schoolhouse 。 。 。 insect。 ［11］ 灌 灑 
蛇	Insect 。 。 。 house 。 。 。 spoon。 ［11］ 灘 灣 火 
虹	Insect 。 。 。 craft。 ［9］ 灯 灰 
蝶	Insect 。 。 。 generation 。 。 。 tree。 ［15］ 灸 灼 災 
独	Think of this key word in connection with bachelorhood。 The elements： wild dogs 。 。 。 insect。 ［9］ 炅 炉 
蚕	Heavens 。 。 。 insect。 Be sure to do something about the position of the two elements。 ［10］ 焉 焄 
風	Windy 。 。 。 drops of 。 。 。 insects。 Hint： think of the last two primitives as representing a swarm of gnats、 those tiny drops of pesky insects。 ［9］ 炊 炎 炒 
己	The kanji carries the abstract sense of the self、 the deep－down inner structure of the human person that mythology has oft en depicted as a snake—which is what the kanji shows pictographically。 Be sure to keep it distinct from the similar key words、 oneself （frame 36） and I （frame 17）。 ［3］ 炙 炫 炬  As a primitive element、 this kanji can be used for the snake— of which it is a pictograph—or any of the various concrete sym bolic meanings the snake has in myth and fable。 ［3］ 
起	Run 。 。 。 snake。 ［10］ 炭 炮 
妃	Woman 。 。 。 snake。 ［6］  炯 炳 
改	Pluralizing the snake and focusing on a single taskmaster may help recommend the image of Ireland’s most famous reformer、 St。 Patrick、 who、 legend has it、 drove away the snakes from the land。 ［7］ 炸 点 
記	Words 。 。 。 snake。 ［10］ 為 炻 
包	Bind up 。 。 。 snake。 ［5］ 烈 烋  The primitive meaning of wrap should always be used with the snake in mind to avoid confusion with similar terms。Just let “wrap” mean “with a snake coiled about it。” 
胞	Part of the body 。 。 。 wrap。 ［9］ 烏 烙 
砲	Stones 。 。 。 wrap。 ［10］ 烝 烟 
泡	Water 。 。 。 wrap。 ［8］ 烱 烹 
亀	This is not a turtle （see frame 235） but a tortoise、 however you wish to picture the diff erence。 Let the “bound up” at the top refer to the head、 and the two suns、 with a long tail running through it、 to the shell。 ［11］ 焔 焙 焚  As a primitive、 this kanji is abbreviated to its bottom half、 者、 and comes to mean eel。 （If it is any help、 this kanji in its full form can also be remembered through its abbreviation’s primitive meaning。） 
電	Rain／weather 。 。 。 eel。 ［13］ 焜 無 
竜	Vase 。 。 。 eel。 In order not to confuse this kanji with the zodiacal sign of the dragon、 which we will meet later （frame 2008） and use as a primitive、 you might think here of a paper parade dragon。 ［10］ 焦 然 
滝	Water 。 。 。 vase 。 。 。 eels。 To avoid the confusion mentioned in the previous frame、 the character learned there for dragon should not be used as a primitive。 ［13］  焼 煆 煇 
豚	Flesh 。 。 。 sow。 ［11］ 煢 煤 
逐	Sows 。 。 。 road。 ［10］ 煥 煦 
遂	The horns atop the sow suggest a boar at work in the background。 Add the element for a road。 Now create a story whose meaning is： consummate。 ［12］ 照 煩 煬 
家	This is the full character whose primitive form we learned already。 To help a little、 this kanji recalls the times when the “domestic” animals were、 as the word itself suggests、 really kept in the house。 Hence： house 。 。 。 sow。 ［10］ 煮 煽 
嫁	The kanji in this frame demonstrates the traditional Japanese approach to marriage： it is the woman who leaves her family for another household、 thus marrying into a man’s family。 ［13］ 熄 熈 
豪	Tall 。 。 。 crowned 。 。 。 sow。 ［14］ 熊 熏 熔 
腸	Flesh 。 。 。 piggy bank。 ［13］ 熾 燁 
場	Soil 。 。 。 piggy bank。 ［12］ 燃 燈 
湯	Water 。 。 。 piggy bank。 ［12］ 燉 燎 
羊	This pictograph shows the animal horns at the top attached to the head （3rd stroke）、 the front and back legs （strokes 4 and 5） and body （final stroke）。 ［6］ 燐 燒 燔  The primitive meaning of sheep can add the further connotations given in the following frame。As we saw with the cow、 the “tail” is cut off when it is set immediately over another element： 胝。 Note the change in stroke order、 as exemplified in the following frame。 
美	Try to think of what the Chinese were on to when they associated the idea of beauty with a large sheep。 ［9］ 餮 餽 餾 饂 饅 
洋	Water 。 。 。 sheep。 Be sure to keep the stories and key word of this kanji distinct from those for sea。 （frame 461）。 ［9］ 營 燠 
詳	Words／speaking 。 。 。 sheep。 ［13］ 燥 燦 
鮮	Fish 。 。 。 sheep。 ［17］ 燧 燬 
達	The key word is meant to connote someone “skilled” at something。 On the road we find soil over a sheep。 You may have to work with this one a while longer。 ［12］ 燭 燮 燵 
羨	Sheep 。 。 。 water 。 。 。 yawn／lack。 Although this character looks rather simple、 special care should be taken in learning it because of the proximity of the final two elements to the character for next、 which we learned in frame 471。 Note、 too、 that the water comes under the sheep、 rather than on its own to the left 。 ［13］ 燹 燻 燼 
差	Wool 。 。 。 craft。 ［10］ 爆 爍 
着	I cannot resist doing this one for you、 since it clearly describes donning （putting on） one’s clothes as “pulling the wool over one’s eyes。” ［12］ 爐 爛 
唯	Mouth 。 。 。 turkey。 ［11］ 爺 爻 
焦	Turkey 。 。 。 oven fire。 ［12］ 爼 爽 
礁	Rocks 。 。 。 char。 ［17］ 爾 爿 
集	Turkeys 。 。 。 atop a tree。 ［12］ 牀 牆 
准	Ice 。 。 。 turkey。 ［10］ 片 版 
進	Turkey 。 。 。 road。 ［11］ 牋 牌 
雑	Baseball 。 。 。 trees 。 。 。 turkey。 ［14］ 牒 牘 牙 
雌	This character for female forms a pair with that for male、 which we will learn later （frame 743）。 The elements： footprint 。 。 。 spoon 。 。 。 turkey。 ［14］ 牛 牝 牟 
準	Think of this in terms of the semifinals of some sports competition。 Water 。 。 。 turkeys 。 。 。 needle。 ［13］ 牡 牢 牣 
奮	St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 turkey 。 。 。 rice field／brains。 ［16］ 牧 物 牲 
奪	Whereas burglary （frame 357） implies clandestine appropriation of another’s property、 robbery refers to taking by force。 The primitive elements： St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 turkey 。 。 。 glue。 ［14］ 牴 特 牽 
確	On the left you see the rock、 which is familiar enough。 But pay attention to the right。 Taking careful note of the unusual stroke order that has the “chimney” on the house doubled up with the first stroke of the turkey、 we may see the right side as a turkey house （or “coop”）。 We shall see this pattern only on one other occasion （frame  1943）、 but even for these two characters it is well worth the trouble to single it out as a primitive。 ［15］ 牾 犀 犁 犂 
午	With a bit of stretching、 you might see a horse’s head pointing left ward in this character。 That gives the primary meaning of the Chinese zodiacal sign of the horse、 which corresponds to the hour of noon。 Note how this kanji primitive diff ers from that for cow （frame 245）。 ［4］ 犒 犖 犠 犢  As a primitive、 this character gets the meaning of a horse。 Any horse image will do、 except that of a team of horses、 which will come later （frame 1978） and get its own primitive。 
許	Words 。 。 。 horse。 ［11］ 犧 犬 
歓	Again I cannot resist sharing my own associations。 If you’ve ever seen Disney’s animated interpretation of classical music、 “Fantasia、” you will recall what was done there with Beet hoven’s “Pastoral Symphony” （the 6th）、 and the flying horses that figured in it。 The mares are bathing in the stream and the stallions begin to gather。 As dusk sets in、 the flying horses all start yawning and pair off for the night： a perfectly delightful portrait of delight。 ［15］ 犲 状 
権	Tree 。 。 。 Pegasus。 ［15］ 犹 犾 
観	Pegasus 。 。 。 see。 ［18］ 狂 狃 
羽	From the pictograph of two bird－wings、 we get feathers。 ［6］ 狄 狆 狎 狐  The related image of wings can be added as a primitive meaning。 It can also take the form 致 when used as a primitive、 as we shall see in frames 576 and 577。 
習	Feathers 。 。 。 white bird。 ［11］ 狒 狗 
翌	Feathers 。 。 。 vase。 Be sure to contrast the connotation of this key word with that for next （frame 471）。 ［11］ 狙 狛 
曜	Day 。 。 。 feathers 。 。 。 turkey。 ［18］ 狠 狡 狢 
濯	Water 。 。 。 feathers 。 。 。 turkey ［17］ 狩 独 狭 
曰	Pent in 。 。 。 one。 The key word refers to famous sayings of famous people、 and is the origin for the primitive meaning of a tongue wagging in the mouth that we learned in frame 12。 The size of this kanji、 a relatively rare one、 is what distinguishes it from day。 ［4］ 狼 狽 猊 
困	Pent in 。 。 。 trees。 ［7］ 猖 猗 猛 猜 猝 猟 猤 
固	Old 。 。 。 pent in。 Leave the people out of your story to avoid complications later when we add the element for person to form a new kanji （frame 973）。 ［8］ 
国	Jewels 。 。 。 pent in。 ［8］ 
団	Glued 。 。 。 pent in。 ［6］ 
因	St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 pent in。 ［6］ 
姻	Woman 。 。 。 cause。 Think here of the “state of matrimony” and you will not confuse it with other characters involving marriage、 one of which we have already met （frame 542）。 ［9］ 
園	Pent in 。 。 。 lidded crock 。 。 。 scarf。 ［13］ 
回	The suffix “－times” refers to a number of repetitions。 Its elements： a mouth 。 。 。 pent in。 Hint： you may find it more helpful to forget the primitives and think of one circle revolving inside of another。 ［6］ 猥 猩 猪 
壇	Soil／ground 。 。 。 top hat 。 。 。 －times 。 。 。 nightbreak。 With kanji as difficult as this one、 it generally pays to toy with the various connotations of its primitives before settling on one image。 Aim for as much simplicity as you can。 ［16］ 
店	Cave 。 。 。 fortune－telling。 ［8］ 猴 猶 
庫	Cave 。 。 。 car。 ［10］ 
庭	Cave 。 。 。 courts。 ［10］ 
庁	Cave 。 。 。 a spike。 ［5］ 
床	Cave 。 。 。 tree。 ［7］ 
麻	Cave 。 。 。 grove。 If it helps、 this is the hemp marijuana comes from。 ［11］ 
磨	Hemp 。 。 。 stone。 ［16］ 猷 猾 
心	This character、 a pictographic representation of the heart、 is among the most widely used primitives we shall meet。 ［4］ 猿 獄 獅 獎  As a primitive、 it can take three forms、 to which we shall assign three distinct meanings。 In its kanji－form、 it appears beneath or to the right of its relative primitive and means the physical organ of the heart。 To the left、 it is abbreviated to three strokes、 忄、 and means a wildly emotional state of mind。 And finally、 at the very bottom、 it can take the form 胸、 in which case we give it the meaning of a valentine。 
忘	Perish 。 。 。 heart。 ［7］ 
忍	Blade 。 。 。 heart。 Endure here means long－suff ering patience。 ［7］ 
認	Words 。 。 。 endure。 ［14］ 
忌	Snake 。 。 。 heart。 ［7］ 
志	Samurai 。 。 。 heart。 ［7］ 
誌	Words 。 。 。 intention。 ［14］ 
忠	In the middle of a 。 。 。 heart。 ［8］ 
串	This pictograph of two pieces of meat on a skewer、 a shish kebab、 will help us in the next frame。 ［7］ 獏 獗 獣 
患	Shish kebab 。 。 。 heart。 ［11］ 
思	Brains 。 。 。 heart。 ［9］ 
恩	Take grace in its sense of a favor freely bestowed、 not in its meaning of charming manners or fluid movement。 The primitives： cause 。 。 。 heart。 ［10］ 
応	Cave 。 。 。 heart。 The sense of the key word here is of something appropriate that fills a particular need、 and hence “applies。” ［7］ 
意	Sound 。 。 。 heart。 ［13］ 
想	To distinguish this kanji from that of the previous frame、 focus on the sense of the “con－” in the word “concept。” Its elements are： inter－ 。 。 。 heart。 ［13］ 
息	Nose 。 。 。 heart。 ［10］ 
憩	tongue 。 。 。 nose 。 。 。 heart。 The sense of breath from the last frame should not be used； it could lead you to put only the nose over the heart and leave the tongue off to one side。 ［16］ 
恵	Ten 。 。 。 fields （or： needle 。 。 。 brains） 。 。 。 heart。 ［10］ 
恐	Craft 。 。 。 mediocre 。 。 。 heart。 ［10］ 
惑	The first three elements、 fiesta 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 、 appeared together once already in frame 356。 Beneath them、 once again、 the heart。 ［12］ 
感	Mouths 。 。 。 marching 。 。 。 heart。 ［13］ 
憂	Head 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 heart 。 。 。 walking legs。 Two things merit mention here。 First、 the doubling－up of the last stroke of head with the top of the crown serves to make the whole more aesthetically beautiful。 It happens so rarely that the exceptions are easily learned。 Second、 try to make a single image out of the four elements。 （Religious statuary of melancholy figures should off er plenty of suggestions。） ［15］ 獨 獪 獰 獲 
寡	House 。 。 。 head 。 。 。 dagger。 Immediately we get another instance of a very odd exception。 Notice how the final stroke of the head is lengthened、 giving the final two strokes a chance to stretch out and make room for the dagger that fits in beneath。 ［14］ 獵 獷 獸 獺 獻 
忙	State of mind 。 。 。 perish。 ［6］ 航 舫 般 舮 舳 舵 
悦	State of mind 。 。 。 devil。 ［10］ 
恒	State of mind 。 。 。 span。 ［9］ 
悼	To keep this character distinct from others of similar connotation、 one need only think of the Prophet Jeremiah whose poetry gave an eminence to the state of mind we call lamentation。 ［11］ 
悟	I know of an Indian religious sect which teaches that enlightenment is to be had by covering the eyes with one’s index fingers、 the ears with the thumbs、 and the mouth with the little fingers。 While these diff er a bit from the five holes that we used to represent the “I” （frame 17）、 the idea of achieving a special state of mind by covering those five places can help you learn this kanji。 You might try the position out while you are learning this character。 ［10］ 
怖	State of mind 。 。 。 linen。 ［8］ 
慌	State of mind 。 。 。 laid waste。 ［12］ 
悔	State of mind 。 。 。 every （see frame 458）。 ［9］ 
憎	State of mind 。 。 。 increase。 ［14］ 
慣	State of mind 。 。 。 pierce。 ［14］ 
愉	State of mind 。 。 。 butchers （see frame 289）。 ［12］ 
惰	State of mind 。 。 。 left （i。e。 “sinister”） 。 。 。 flesh。 ［12］ 
慎	State of mind 。 。 。 truth。 ［13］ 
憾	State of mind 。 。 。 emotion。 Hint： the etymology of “remorse” indicates a memory that returns again and again to “bite at” one’s conscience and disturb one’s peace of mind。 ［16］ 
憶	State of mind 。 。 。 idea。 ［16］ 
慕	Graveyard 。 。 。 valentine。 Note carefully the stroke order of the valentine primitive。 ［14］ 玄 率 玉 王 玖 
添	Water 。 。 。 heavens 。 。 。 valentine。 ［11］ 
必	First note the stroke order of this character、 which did not really evolve from the heart、 even though we take it that way。 If one takes it as a pictograph “dividing” the heart in half、 then one has one of those invariably true bits of human anatomy： the fact that each heart is divided into two halves。 ［5］ 玩 玲 玳 玻 玽 
泌	Water 。 。 。 the invariably divided heart。 ［8］ 
手	Any way you count them、 there are either too many or too few fingers to see a good pictograph of a hand in this character。 But that it is、 and so you must。 ［4］ 珀 珂 珈 珉  Keep to the etymology when using this kanji as a primitive： a single hand all by itself。 
看	Hand 。 。 。 eyes。 ［9］ 珊 珍 
摩	Hemp 。 。 。 hand。 ［15］ 
我	Hand 。 。 。 fiesta。 Note how the second stroke of the hand is stretched across to double up as the first stroke of the tasseled arrow we use for fiesta。 Compare to frames 17、 36、 and 525。 ［7］ 珎 珒 珖 珞 珠 珣 珥 
義	Sheep 。 。 。 ego。 ［13］ 
議	Words 。 。 。 righteousness。 ［20］ 
犠	Cow 。 。 。 righteousness。 Do not use the image of an animal sacrifice here、 as that will have its own character later on。 ［17］ 
抹	Fingers 。 。 。 extremity。 ［8］ 
抱	Fingers 。 。 。 wrap。 ［8］ 
搭	The key word refers to boarding vessels for travel。 Its elements are： finger 。 。 。 flowers 。 。 。 fit together （see frame 254）。 ［12］ 
抄	Fingers 。 。 。 a few。 ［7］ 
抗	Fingers 。 。 。 a whirlwind。 ［7］ 
批	Finger 。 。 。 compare。 ［7］ 
招	Finger 。 。 。 seduce。 ［8］ 
拓	Fingers 。 。 。 rocks。 ［8］ 
拍	Fingers 。 。 。 white。 ［8］ 
打	Finger 。 。 。 spike。 ［5］ 
拘	Fingers 。 。 。 phrase。 ［8］ 
捨	Fingers 。 。 。 cottage。 ［11］ 
拐	Finger 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 dagger。 ［8］ 
摘	Finger 。 。 。 antique。 ［14］ 
挑	Fingers 。 。 。 portent。 ［9］ 
指	Finger 。 。 。 delicious。 ［9］ 
持	Fingers 。 。 。 Buddhist temple。 ［9］ 
括	Finger 。 。 。 tongue。 ［9］ 
揮	Finger 。 。 。 chariot。 ［12］ 
推	Fingers 。 。 。 turkey。 ［11］ 
揚	Fingers 。 。 。 piggy bank。 ［12］ 
提	Fingers 。 。 。 just so。 ［12］ 
損	Finger 。 。 。 employee。 ［13］ 
拾	Fingers 。 。 。 fit together。 Compare frame 646。 ［9］ 
担	The key word of this frame refers to shouldering a burden of some sort。 Its elements are： fingers 。 。 。 nightbreak。 ［8］ 
拠	Fingers 。 。 。 dispose。 ［8］ 
描	Fingers 。 。 。 seedling。 ［11］ 
操	Fingers 。 。 。 goods 。 。 。 tree。 ［16］ 
接	Fingers 。 。 。 vase 。 。 。 woman。 ［11］ 
掲	Fingers 。 。 。 siesta。 ［11］ 
掛	Fingers 。 。 。 ivy 。 。 。 magic wand。 ［11］ 
研	Stone 。 。 。 two hands。 ［9］ 
戒	Two hands 。 。 。 fiesta。 ［7］ 琅 理 琇 
械	Tree 。 。 。 commandment。 ［11］ 
鼻	Let me share a rather grotesque image to help with this kanji。 Imagine taking your two hands and reaching up into someone’s nostrils。 Once inside you grab hold of the brain and yank it out。 At the end、 you would have a picture something like that of this character、 the full kanji for nose。 ［14］ 
刑	Two hands 。 。 。 saber。 ［6］ 
型	Punish 。 。 。 soil。 In cases like this、 you might find it easier to break the character up into its more basic elements、 like this： two hands 。 。 。 saber 。 。 。 soil。 ［9］ 
才	Whatever one is particularly adept at—one’s special “genius”— one can do very easily、 “with one finger” as the phrase goes。 This kanji is a pictograph of that one finger。 Note how its distinctive form is created by writing the final stroke of the element for fingers backwards。 ［3］ 琉 琢 琥  The primitive meaning、genie、 derives from the roots of the word genius。 Use the genie out in the open when the primitive appears to the right of or below its relative primitive； in that case it also keeps its same form。 At the left 、 the form is altered to 能、 and the meaning becomes a genie in the bottle。 
財	Clam 。 。 。 genie。 ［10］ 
材	Tree 。 。 。 genie。 ［7］ 
存	Genie in the bottle 。 。 。 a child。 Hint： focus on the key word’s connotation of “make believe”。 ［6］ 琦 琩 琪 琮 
在	Genie in the bottle 。 。 。 soil。 ［6］ 
乃	This pictograph of a clenched fist is another of the “handprimitives。” Take note of its rather peculiar drawing。 Try to think of drawing a fist （the primitive meaning） “from” this character to give yourself a connotation for the otherwise abstract key word。 ［2］ 琲 琳  The primitive meaning is taken from the pictograph：a fist。 
携	Fingers 。 。 。 turkey 。 。 。 fist。 ［13］ 
及	The addition of a final stroke transforms this character from the primitive for a clenched fist into the kanji for reaching out、 much as a stroke of kindness can oft en turn anger into acceptance。 ［3］ 琴 琵 琶  As a primitive、 this shall stand for outstretched hands。 Only take care not to confuse it with that for beg （frame 462） 
吸	Mouth 。 。 。 outstretched hands。 Hint： use the image of a nursing baby。 ［6］ 
扱	Finger 。 。 。 outstretched hands。 ［6］ 
丈	The length whose measure this kanji depicts extends from the tip of one hand to the tip of the other with arms at full length。 Notice the final stroke、 which cuts across the vertical second stroke to distinguish it from large （frame 107）。 ［3］ 瑁 瑕 瑙 
史	A mouth 。 。 。 tucked under the arm。 ［5］ 瑚 瑛 瑜 
吏	One 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 tucked under the arm。 ［6］ 
更	The implication behind the meaning of grow late is that things are changing in the same way that the day turns into night。 The elements： ceiling 。 。 。 sun 。 。 。 tucked under the arm。 ［7］  瑞 瑟 瑠 
硬	Rocks 。 。 。 grow late。 ［12］ 
又	Like the several abbreviations in Roman script to indicate “and” （＋、 ＆、 etc。）、 this short two－stroke kanji is used for the similar meaning of or again。 ［2］ 瑢 瑣  As a primitive、 it will mean crotch、 as in the crotch of the arm。 Or whatever。 
双	The crotch reduplicated gives us a pair。 ［4］ 
桑	Crotches、 crotches everywhere 。 。 。 tree。 Hint： think of a group of children playing an original version of “Here We Go ’Round the Mulberry Bush。” ［10］ 
隻	The key word indicates the Japanese generic term for counting ships。 Its elements： turkey 。 。 。 crotch。 ［10］ 
護	Words 。 。 。 flowers 。 。 。 vessels。 ［20］ 
獲	A pack of wild dogs 。 。 。 flowers 。 。 。 vessels。 Do not confuse this with the character for arrest （frame 654）。 ［16］ 
奴	Woman 。 。 。 crotch。 ［5］ 
怒	Guy 。 。 。 heart。 ［9］ 
友	By one’s side 。 。 。 crotch。 ［4］ 絎 絏 結 絖 
抜	Fingers 。 。 。 friend。 ［7］ 
投	Fingers 。 。 。 missile。 ［7］ 
没	Water 。 。 。 missile。 ［7］ 
設	Words 。 。 。 missile。 ［11］ 
撃	Car 。 。 。 missile 。 。 。 hand。 ［15］  瑰 瑳 瑶 
殻	Samurai 。 。 。 superfluous 。 。 。 missile。 ［11］ 瑾 璃 璉 
支	Needle 。 。 。 crotch。 ［4］ 璋 璞 
技	Fingers 。 。 。 branch。 ［7］ 
枝	Tree 。 。 。 branch。 Take a moment to focus on the diff erences between a bough、 a branch、 and a twig （frame 298）。 ［8］ 
肢	Part of the body 。 。 。 branch。 ［8］ 
茎	Flower 。 。 。 spool。 ［8］ 
怪	State of mind 。 。 。 spool。 ［8］ 
軽	Car 。 。 。 spool。 ［12］ 
叔	Above 。 。 。 little 。 。 。 crotch。 ［8］ 璧 環 璽 
督	Uncle 。 。 。 eye。 ［13］ 
寂	House 。 。 。 uncle。 ［11］ 
淑	Water 。 。 。 uncle。 ［11］ 
反	Cliff 。 。 。 crotch。 ［4］ 
坂	Ground 。 。 。 anti－。 ［7］ 
板	Tree 。 。 。 anti－。 ［8］ 
返	Anti－ 。 。 。 road。 ［7］ 
販	Shells／money 。 。 。 anti－。 ［11］ 
爪	This character is a pictograph of a bird’s claw、 and from there comes to mean animal claws in general （including human fingernails）。 ［4］ 瓊 瓏 瓔 瓜  As a primitive、 we shall use the graphic image of a vulture、 a bird known for its powerful claws。 It generally appears above another primitive、 in which case it gets squeezed into the form 爫。 
妥	Vulture 。 。 。 woman。 ［7］ 
乳	Fledglings 。 。 。 hook。 ［8］ 
浮	Water 。 。 。 fledglings。 ［10］ 
将	Turtle 。 。 。 vulture 。 。 。 glue。 ［10］ 
奨	Leader 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog。 Do not confuse with urge （frame  282）。 ［13］ 
採	Unlike pick up （frame 667）、 this character is used for picking fruits from trees。 Its elements： finger 。 。 。 vulture 。 。 。 tree。 ［11］ 
菜	Flower 。 。 。 vulture 。 。 。 tree。 ［11］ 
受	Birdhouse 。 。 。 crotch。 ［8］ 
授	Fingers 。 。 。 accept。 ［11］ 
愛	Birdhouse 。 。 。 heart 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［13］ 瓧 瓩 瓮 
払	Finger 。 。 。 elbow。 ［5］ 
広	Cave。 。 。 elbow。 ［5］ 
拡	Fingers 。 。 。 wide。 The connection with the previous character is very close。 Beware。 ［8］ 
鉱	Metal 。 。 。 wide。 ［13］ 
弁	Elbow 。 。 。 two hands。 ［5］ 
雄	By one’s side 。 。 。 elbow 。 。 。 turkey。 Its match is in frame 563。 ［12］ 
台	Elbow 。 。 。 mouth。 ［5］ 
怠	Pedestal 。 。 。 heart。 ［9］ 
治	Water 。 。 。 pedestal。 ［8］ 
始	Woman 。 。 。 pedestal。 ［8］ 
胎	Part of the body 。 。 。 pedestal。 ［9］ 
窓	House 。 。 。 human legs 。 。 。 elbow 。 。 。 heart。 ［11］ 瓲 瓶 瓷 瓸 
去	Soil 。 。 。 elbow。 ［5］ 甁 甃 
法	Water 。 。 。 gone。 ［8］ 
会	Meeting 。 。 。 wall。 This is the full character for meeting、 from which the abbreviated primitive that we met back in Lesson 12 gets its name。 ［6］ 甄 甅 
至	Wall 。 。 。 soil。 The key word allows for the full variety of connotations： to peak、 to arrive at the end、 and the like。 ［6］ 甌 甍 
室	House 。 。 。 climax。 ［9］ 
到	Climax 。 。 。 saber。 ［8］ 
致	The archaic English form for “does” indicates a humble form of the verb “to do。” It is made up of climax and taskmaster。 ［10］ 
互	When you draw this character think of linking two walls together、 one right side up and the other upside down。 ［4］ 絡 絢 絣 給 
棄	Infant 。 。 。 buckle （see frame 415） 。 。 。 tree。 ［13］ 甓 甕 甘 
育	Since the key word has to do with raising children to be strong both in mind and body、 it is easy to coordinate the primitive elements： infant 。 。 。 meat。 ［8］ 
撤	Fingers 。 。 。 bring up 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［15］ 甚 甜 甞 
充	Infant 。 。 。 human legs。 ［6］ 
銃	Metal 。 。 。 allot。 ［14］ 
硫	Rock 。 。 。 infant 。 。 。 flood。 ［12］ 
流	Water 。 。 。 infant 。 。 。 flood。 Be sure to distinguish the two waterprimitives from one another in making your story。 ［10］ 
允	Elbow 。 。 。 human legs。 ［4］ 
唆	Mouth 。 。 。 license 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［10］ 絨 絮 統 
出	The kanji for exit pictures a series of mountain peaks coming out of the earth。 Learn it together with the following frame。 ［5］ 生 産 甥 甦 用 
山	Note the clearer outline of a triangular mountain here。 ［3］ 紗 紘 紙 
拙	Fingers 。 。 。 exit。 ［8］ 
岩	Mountain 。 。 。 rock。 ［8］ 
炭	Mountain 。 。 。 ashes。 ［9］ 
岐	Mountains 。 。 。 branch。 ［7］ 
峠	Mountain 。 。 。 above 。 。 。 below。 ［9］ 級 紛 紜 
崩	Mountain 。 。 。 companion。 ［11］ 
密	House 。 。 。 invariably 。 。 。 mountain。 ［11］ 絲 絳 絵 
蜜	House 。 。 。 invariably 。 。 。 insect。 ［14］ 
嵐	Mountain 。 。 。 winds。 ［12］ 
崎	Mountain 。 。 。 strange。 Hint： you might save yourself the trouble of a story here simply by recalling the kanji for cape （frame 153） and toying around with the diff ering images suggested by the key words promontory and cape。 ［11］ 
入	This character is meant to be a picture of someone walking left ward、 putting one leg forward in order to enter someplace。 Since the “in” side of a character is the left 、 it should be easy to remember the writing of this character。 ［2］ 甫 甬  As a primitive、 the meaning of the key word is expanded to include： to go in、 to put in、 to come in、 and the like。 It generally appears atop its relative primitive、 where、 unlike the element for umbrella 聿、 the two strokes do not touch each other、 making it virtually the same as the kanji for eight。 When it appears in any other position、 however、 it retains its original form。 
込	Enter 。 。 。 road。 ［5］ 
分	Go in 。 。 。 dagger。 ［4］  絶 絹 
貧	Part 。 。 。 shells／money。 ［11］ 
頒	Part 。 。 。 head。 ［13］ 
公	Come in 。 。 。 elbows。 Use the key word in its adjectival sense、 not as a noun。 ［4］ 
松	Tree 。 。 。 public。 ［8］ 
翁	Public 。 。 。 feathers。 ［10］ 
訟	Words 。 。 。 public。 ［11］ 
谷	Go in 。 。 。 an umbrella 。 。 。 a mouth。 Because of space restrictions、 the element for go in is shortened in this character。 If you stand on your head and look at this kanji、 the image of a valley stands out more clearly： the mouth of the river whose water flows down at the intersection of the two mountains、 with the final two strokes adding the element of perspective。 Now get back on your feet again and see if the image still remains clear。 If not、 then return to the primitives and make a story in the usual way。 ［7］ 素 紡 索 
浴	Water 。 。 。 valley。 ［10］ 
容	This character depicts a house so large that it can contain an entire valley。 ［10］ 
溶	Water 。 。 。 contain。 ［13］ 
欲	Valley 。 。 。 yawn。 Be sure to keep the key word distinct from pining （frame 633）。 ［11］ 
裕	This character shows the typical cloak of valley folk、 which、 unlike the tailor－made、 high－fashion overcoats of city folk、 is loose－fitting and free－form。 Hence the key word’s meaning of abundant。 ［12］ 
鉛	 Metal 。 。 。 gully。 ［13］ 
沿	Water 。 。 。 gully。 The key word is meant to refer to things like rivers and railway tracks that run alongside something else。 ［8］ 
賞	Outhouse 。 。 。 shellfish。 ［15］ 
党	Think of this key word as referring to a political party、 not a gala aff air。 Its elements： human legs 。 。 。 sticking out of an outhouse window。 ［10］ 
堂	Outhouse 。 。 。 land。 ［11］ 
常	Outhouse 。 。 。 towel。 ［11］ 
裳	The key word refers to an ancient skirt once used as part of a woman’s costume。 The primitives you have to work with are： outhouse 。 。 。 garment。 ［14］ 
掌	Outhouse 。 。 。 hand。 ［12］ 
皮	The simplest way to remember this character is to see it as built up from that for branch。 The first stroke can then stand for something “hanging” down from the branch、 namely its bark or pelt。 The barb at the end of the second stroke is the only other change。 Merely by concentrating on this as you write the following small cluster of characters should be enough to fix the form in your mind。 By way of exception、 you might doodle around with the kanji’s form to see what you can come up with。 ［5］ 男 甸 町 画 甼 
波	Water’s 。 。 。 pelt。 ［8］ 
婆	Waves 。 。 。 woman。 ［11］ 
披	Fingers 。 。 。 pelt。 ［8］ 
破	Rock 。 。 。 pelt。 ［10］ 
被	Cloak 。 。 。 pelt。 ［10］ 畄 畆 
残	Bones 。 。 。 （parade） float。 ［10］ 
殉	Bones 。 。 。 decameron。 ［10］ 
殊	Bones 。 。 。 vermilion。 ［10］ 
殖	Bones 。 。 。 straightaway。 ［12］ 
列	Bones 。 。 。 saber。 The sense of the key word is of people or things lined up in a row。 ［6］ 
裂	File 。 。 。 garment。 ［12］ 
烈	File 。 。 。 oven fire。 ［10］ 
死	Bones 。 。 。 spoon。 Note how the first stroke is extended to the right、 forming a sort of “roof” overhead。 ［6］ 
葬	Flowers 。 。 。 death 。 。 。 two hands。 Compare bury （frame  179）。［12］ 
瞬	Eye 。 。 。 birdhouse 。 。 。 sunglasses。 ［18］ 
耳	The pictograph for the earlooks much like that for eye、 but note how the stroke order gives it a diff erent look。 ［6］ 紫 紬 紮 累 細 紲 
取	Ear 。 。 。 crotch。 ［8］ 
趣	Run 。 。 。 take。 ［15］ 
最	Sun 。 。 。 take。 ［12］ 
撮	Finger 。 。 。 utmost。 This character is used for taking photographs。 Note how、 conveniently、 the element for “take” is included in it。 ［15］ 
恥	Ear 。 。 。 heart。 It is most rare to have the heart at the right、 rather than at the bottom。 Take advantage of this fact when you compose your story。 ［10］ 
職	The key word refers to one’s occupation、 or position of employment。 Its elements： ear 。 。 。 kazoo。 ［18］ 
聖	Ear 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 king。 ［13］ 
敢	Spike 。 。 。 ear 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［12］ 
聴	Ear 。 。 。 needle 。 。 。 eye 。 。 。 heart。 Compare frame 400 for this and the following kanji、 and then once again when you get to frame 885。 ［17］ 
懐	State of mind 。 。 。 needle 。 。 。 eyes 。 。 。 garment。 ［16］ 
慢	State of mind 。 。 。 mandala。 ［14］ 
漫	Water 。 。 。 mandala。 ［14］ 
買	Eye 。 。 。 shellfish。 ［12］ 
置	Eye 。 。 。 straightaway。 ［13］ 
罰	Eye 。 。 。 words 。 。 。 saber。 ［14］ 
寧	House 。 。 。 heart 。 。 。 eye 。 。 。 spike。 ［14］ 
濁	The key word for this kanji connotes the “muddying” eff ect on a soft consonant brought about by vibrating the vocal chords。 For example、 in English a “j” is voiced while a “sh” is unvoiced。 In Japanese、 theし is changed toじ when it is voiced。 The primitives are： water 。 。 。eye 。 。 。 bound up 。 。 。 insect。 ［16］ 
環	Jewel 。 。 。 eye 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 scarf。 The number of elements is large here、 so take care。 Learn it in conjunction with the next frame、 since these are the only two cases in this book where the combination of elements to the right appears。 ［17］ 
還	Road 。 。 。 eye 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 scarf。 ［16］ 
夫	The kanji for a husband or “head of the family” is based on the kanji for large and an extra line near the top for the “head。” Recall the kanji for heavens already learned back in frame 428、 and be sure to keep your story for this kanji diff erent。 ［4］ 畠 畢 畤 略 
扶	Fingers 。 。 。 husband。 ［7］ 
渓	Water 。 。 。 vulture 。 。 。 husband。 ［11］ 
規	Husband 。 。 。 see。 ［11］ 
替	Two husbands 。 。 。 day。 ［12］ 
賛	Two husbands 。 。 。 shells。 ［15］ 
潜	Water 。 。 。 exchange。 ［15］ 
失	”To lose” here takes the sense of “misplace、” not the sense of defeat、 whose kanji we learned in frame 63。 It pictures a husband with something falling from his side as he is walking along、 something he loses。 ［5］ 畦 畧  As a primitive、 this character can also mean to drop。 
鉄	Metal 。 。 。 to drop。 ［13］ 
迭	To drop 。 。 。 road。 ［8］ 
臣	This kanji is actually a pictograph for an eye、 distorted to make it appear that the pupil is protruding towards the right。 This may not be an easy form to remember、 but try this： Draw it once rather large、 and notice how moving the two vertical lines on the right as far right as possible gives you the pictograph of the eye in its natural form。 The “pop－eye” image belongs to an Emperor’s retainer standing in awe before his ruler。 ［7］ 畩 番 畫 畭 畯 異 畳  As a primitive、 the meaning of the key word becomes slave。 
姫	Woman 。 。 。 slave。 ［10］ 
蔵	Flowers 。 。 。 parade 。 。 。 slaves。 ［15］ 絽 綀 綉 綏 
臓	Part of the body 。 。 。 storehouse。 ［19］ 經 継 
賢	Slave 。 。 。 crotch 。 。 。 shellfish。 ［16］ 
堅	Slave 。 。 。 crotch 。 。 。 soil。 ［12］ 
臨	Slave 。 。 。 reclining 。 。 。 goods。 The key word suggests both looking ahead to something and “seeing to” what is at hand。 Consistent with everything that we have learned about the role of the key word、 this means that you must choose one meaning and stick to it。 ［18］ 
覧	Slaves 。 。 。 reclining 。 。 。  。 。 。 see。 ［17］ 
巨	This kanji depicts a gigantic “pop－eye、” which accounts for its shape。 Be sure not to confuse it with the slave （retainer） we just learned。 ［5］ 続 綛 綜 綟 綠 
拒	Fingers 。 。 。 gigantic。 ［8］ 
力	With a little imagination、 one can see a muscle in this simple、 two－stroke character meaning power。 ［2］ 畴 當  As a primitive、 either muscle or power can be used。 
男	Rice fields 。 。 。 power。 This character is the gender－specific man、 not the generic human person of frame 951。 ［7］ 
労	Schoolhouse 。 。 。 power。 ［7］ 
募	Graveyard 。 。 。 power。 ［12］ 
劣	Few 。 。 。 muscles。 ［6］ 
功	Craft 。 。 。 power。 ［5］ 
勧	Pegasus 。 。 。 power。 ［13］ 
努	Guy 。 。 。 muscle。 ［7］ 
励	Cliff 。 。 。 ten thousand 。 。 。 power。 ［7］ 
加	Muscles 。 。 。 mouth。 This is the only case in which the primitive for muscle appears on the left ； note should be taken of the fact in composing one’s story。 ［5］ 
賀	Add 。 。 。 shells。 ［12］ 
架	Add 。 。 。 trees。 Hint： if you ever played with an “Erector Set” or “Tinker Toys” as a child、 don’t pass up the opportunity to relate it to this kanji’s key word and the element for trees。 ［9］ 
脇	Part of the body 。 。 。 muscles （three of which give us “triceps” or “muscles on top of muscles”）。 You will want to keep the kanji distinct from the one that follows by paying attention to the positioning of the elements。 ［10］ 
脅	Triceps 。 。 。 meat。 ［10］ 
協	This prefix should be kept distinct from inter （frame 209） and mutual （frame 757）。 Its elements： needle 。 。 。 triceps。 ［8］ 
行	By joining the top four strokes、 you should get a picture of the front current of a river、 the stream trailing behind。 Hence the character for going。 ［6］ 畷 畸 畿 疂 疆 疇  As a primitive、 this character has two forms。 Reduced to the left side only、彳、 it can mean a column、 going、 or a line of something or other。 When the middle is opened up to make room for other elements、 it means a boulevard。 
律	This character depicts a calligrapher’s brush and its rhythmic sway as it flows down a column writing kanji on the way。 ［9］ 
復	Going 。 。 。 double back。 ［12］ 
得	Column 。 。 。 nightbreak 。 。 。 glue。 ［11］ 
従	Column 。 。 。 animal horns 。 。 。 mending。 ［10］ 
徒	Line 。 。 。 run。 ［10］ 
待	Line 。 。 。 Buddhist temple。 ［9］ 
往	Column 。 。 。 candlestick。 This character has the special sense of journeying to someplace or other。 ［8］ 
征	Column 。 。 。 correct。 ［8］ 
径	Line 。 。 。 spool。 ［8］ 
彼	Going 。 。 。 pelt。 This kanji refers to the third person singular personal pronoun、 generally in its masculine form。 ［8］ 
役	Going 。 。 。 missile。 ［7］ 
徳	Going 。 。 。 needle 。 。 。 eye 。 。 。 heart。 Refer back now to the note in frame 827。 ［14］ 
徹	Line 。 。 。 bring up 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［15］ 
徴	Line 。 。 。 mountain 。 。 。 king 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［14］ 疉 疊 疋 疎 
懲	Indications 。 。 。 heart。 ［18］ 
微	Line 。 。 。 mountain 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 human legs 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［13］ 
街	This is the character from which the sense of boulevard mentioned in frame 873 derives。 Its elements： boulevard 。 。 ivy。 ［12］ 
衡	Boulevard 。 。 。 bound up 。 。 。 brains 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog。 ［16］ 疏 疑 疔 疚 疝 
稿	The key word connotes the preliminary composition of a plan or manuscript。 Its elements： wheat 。 。 。 tall。 ［15］ 
稼	Wheat 。 。 。 house。 ［15］ 
程	Wheat 。 。 。 display 。 Do not confuse with extremity （frame 217） or boundary （frame 484）。 ［12］ 。 895 tax 税 Wheat 。 。 。 devil。 ［12］ 
稚	Wheat 。 。 。 turkey。 ［13］ 
和	Wheat 。 。 。 mouth。 ［8］ 
移	Wheat 。 。 。 many。 ［11］ 
秒	The reference here isto a second oftime。The elements： wheat 。 。 。 few。 ［9］ 
秋	Wheat 。 。 。 fire。 ［9］ 
愁	Autumn 。 。 。 heart。 ［13］ 
私	Wheat 。 。 。 elbow。 Like the characters for I （frame 17） and ego （frame 640）、 this kanji is also representative of the subject、 with the special connotation of privacy。 ［7］ 
秩	Wheat 。 。 。 drop。 ［10］ 
秘	Cereal 。 。 。 invariably。 ［10］ 
称	Wheat 。 。 。 reclining 。 。 。 little。 ［10］ 
利	Wheat 。 。 。 saber。 Be careful not to confuse with gain （frame  876） or earnings （frame 893）。 ［7］ 
梨	Profit 。 。 。 tree。 ［11］ 
穫	Wheat 。 。 。 flowers 。 。 。 vessels。 Compare frames 700 and 701 for the right side。 ［18］ 
穂	Wheat 。 。 。 favor。 ［15］ 
稲	Wheat 。 。 。 vulture 。 。 。 olden times。 ［14］ 
香	Wheat 。 。 。 sun。 ［9］ 
季	Wheat 。 。 。 child。 ［8］ 
委	Wheat 。 。 。 woman。 ［8］ 
秀	Wheat 。 。 。 fist。 ［7］ 
透	Excel 。 。 。 road－way。 ［10］ 
誘	Words 。 。 。 excel。 Compare beckon （frame 650）、 to urge （frame  282）、 seduce （frame 86）、 and encourage （frame 866） when choosing your connotation。 ［14］ 
穀	Samurai 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 wheat 。 。 。 missile。 ［14］ 
菌	Flowers 。 。 。 pent in 。 。 。 wheat。 ［11］ 
米	This kanji has a pictographic resemblance to a number of grains of rice lying on a plate in the shape of a star。 ［6］ 疳 疵 疸 疹 疼 疽  As a primitive、 it keeps its meaning of rice、 and is meant to connote a very ordinary、 commonplace grain、 in contrast to the primitive for wheat that we just learned。 （This meaning accords well with Japan、 where the output of rice far exceeds that of wheat。） It occasionally takes the shape 脊 when it stands on its own、 or is joined to a line above。 In this case、 we shall have it refer specifically to grains of rice。 This primitive is not to be confused with the similar－looking primitive for water。 While the stroke orders are nearly alike、 grains of rice has 5 strokes、 while water only has 4 because it joins the second and third strokes into one。 Finally、 we may note that by itself the kanji for rice is an abbreviation used for the United States、 which can then also serve as an alternate reading for the main primitive form、 if you so wish。 
粉	Rice 。 。 。 part。 ［10］ 
粘	Rice 。 。 。 fortune－telling。 ［11］ 
粒	Rice 。 。 。 vase。 ［11］ 
粧	Rice 。 。 。 cave 。 。 。 soil。 ［12］ 
迷	Road 。 。 。 United States。 ［9］ 
粋	Rice 。 。 。 game of cricket。 （See frame 116。） ［10］ 
糧	Rice 。 。 。 quantity。 ［18］ 
菊	Flower 。 。 。 bound up 。 。 。 rice。 ［11］ 
奥	A drop 。 。 。 pent in 。 。 。 rice 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog。 Notice that the horizontal line of the bottom primitive doubles up as the final stroke for pent in。 ［12］ 
数	Rice 。 。 。 woman 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［13］ 
楼	Tree 。 。 。 rice 。 。 。 woman。 ［13］ 
類	Rice 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 head。 ［18］ 
漆	Water 。 。 。 tree 。 。 。 umbrella 。 。 。 grains of rice。 ［14］ 
様	 The abbreviation Esq。 will help associate this character with the honorific form of address to which it belongs。 Its elements are： tree 。 。 。sheep 。 。 。 grains of rice。 Note that the final vertical stroke in the element for sheep is extended to form the first stroke for grains of rice。 ［14］ 疾 痂 痃 
求	Let the drop in the upper right－hand corner of this character close the right angle off to make an arrowhead。 Whenever we find the needle with that drop in an element that has no other special meaning、 we will take advantage of this primitive meaning。 At the bottom、 we see the grains of rice、 the vertical line doubling up for the two elements。 Do not confuse with petition （frame 135）。 ［7］ 
球	Ball 。 。 。 request。 ［11］ 
救	Request 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［11］ 
竹	Bamboo grows upwards、 like a straight nail、 and at each stage of its growth （which legend associates with the arrival of the new moon） there is a jointed rootstock （the first stroke）。 Two such bamboo stalks are pictured here。 ［6］ 病 症 痊 痍 痒 痔  As a primitive、 the meaning remains the same、 but the vertical lines are severely abbreviated so that they can take their place at the top where、 like flowers、 they are always to be found。 
笑	Bamboo 。 。 。 heavens。 ［10］ 
笠	Bamboo 。 。 。 vase。 ［11］ 
笹	Bamboo 。 。 。 generation。 ［11］ 
筋	Bamboo 。 。 。 part of the body 。 。 。 power。 Here we see how the primitive meaning of muscle was derived from the kanji for power。 ［12］ 
箱	Bamboo 。 。 。 inter－。 ［15］ 
筆	Bamboo 。 。 。 brush。 ［12］ 
筒	Bamboo 。 。 。 monk。 ［12］ 
等	 Bamboo 。 。 。 Buddhist temple。 ［12］ 
算	Bamboo 。 。 。 eyes 。 。 。 two hands。 ［14］ 
答	Bamboo 。 。 。 fit。 ［12］ 
策	Bamboo 。 。 。 belted tree （see frame 417）。 ［12］ 
簿	Bamboo 。 。 。 water 。 。 。 acupuncturist。 ［19］ 
築	Bamboo 。 。 。 craft 。 。 。 mediocre 。 。 。 wood／tree。 ［16］ 
人	The character for enter （frame 779） showed someone walking inwards （in terms of the direction of writing）。 The one for person、 shown here、 represents someone walking outwards。 ［2］ 痕 痘  As a primitive、 it can keep its kanji form except when it appears to the left （its normal position）、 where it is made to stand up in the form 脛。 The primitive meaning is another matter。 The abstract notion of person so oft en has a relation to the meaning of the kanji that confusion readily sets in。 So many of the previous stories have included people in them that simply to use person for a primitive meaning would be risky。 We need to be more specific、 to focus on one particular person。 Try to choose some－ one who has not figured in the stories so far、 perhaps a colorful member of the family or a friend whom you have known for a long time。 That individual will appear again and again、 so be sure to choose someone who excites your imagination。 
佐	Person 。 。 。 left 。 ［7］ 
但	Person 。 。 。 nightbreak。 ［7］ 
住	Person 。 。 。 candlestick。 ［7］ 
位	Person 。 。 。 vase。 ［7］ 
仲	Person 。 。 。 in。 ［6］ 
体	Person 。 。 。 book。 ［7］ 
悠	Person 。 。 。 walking stick 。 。 。 taskmaster 。 。 。 heart。 ［11］ 
件	Person 。 。 。 cow。 ［6］ 
仕	Person 。 。 。 samurai。 The key word means to wait on someone or serve them。 ［5］ 
他	Person 。 。 。 scorpion。 ［5］ 
伏	Person 。 。 。 chihuahua。 ［6］ 
伝	Person 。 。 。 rising cloud。 Hint： the Amerindians’ smoke signals can help provide a good image for this kanji、 whose key word is meant to include transmissions of all sorts。 ［6］ 
仏	Person 。 。 。 elbow。 ［4］ 
休	Person 。 。 。 tree。 Do not confuse with relax （frame 190）。［6］ 
仮	Person 。 。 。 anti－。 ［6］ 
伯	Person 。 。 。 white dove。 ［7］ 
俗	Person 。 。 。 valley。 The key word should be taken in its older sense of “popular” or “commonplace。” ［9］ 
信	Person 。 。 。 words。 ［9］ 
佳	Person 。 。 。 ivy。 To distinguish from excel （frame 914）、 eminent （frame 51）、 esteem （frame 184）、 and exquisite （frame 123）、 give the key word its own unique connotation。 ［8］ 
依	Person 。 。 。 garment。 ［8］ 
例	Person 。 。 。 file。 ［8］ 
個	Person 。 。 。 harden。 ［10］ 
健	Person 。 。 。 build。 ［11］ 痙 痛 痞 
側	Person 。 。 。 rule。 See frame 88 for help。 ［11］ 
侍	Person 。 。 。 Buddhist temple。 The key word is deceptively modern、 but the character itself is another way of writing “samurai。” Be careful not to confuse with the kanji for attend （frame  960）。［8］ 
停	Person 。 。 。 pavilion。 ［11］ 
値	Person 。 。 。 straightaway。 ［10］ 
倣	Person 。 。 。 set free。 ［10］ 
倒	Person 。 。 。 arrival。 ［10］ 
偵	Person 。 。 。 upright。 ［11］ 
僧	Person 。 。 。 increase。 ［13］ 
億	Person 。 。 。 idea。 ［15］ 
儀	Person 。 。 。 righteousness。 ［15］ 
償	Person 。 。 。 prize。 ［17］ 
仙	Person 。 。 。 mountain。 ［5］ 
催	Hermit 。 。 。 turkey。 Note what has happened to the mountain in the element for hermit。 In order to make room for the turkey、 it was raised and condensed。 ［13］ 
仁	To refer to the fullness of humanity that can only be achieved in dialogue with another （person 。 。 。 two）、 Confucius used this character。 ［4］ 
侮	Every 。 。 。 person。 ［8］ 
使	Person 。 。 。 officer。 ［8］ 
便	Person 。 。 grow late。 Hint： this kanji also means that unmentionable material that one disposes of when one goes to the “conveniences。｀ ［9］ 
倍	Person 。 。 。 muzzle。 Do not confuse with the kanji for duplicate （frame 465）。 ［10］ 
優	Person 。 。 melancholy。 ［17］ 
伐	Person 。 。 。 fiesta。 Hint： recall the German legend of the English missionary、 Saint Boniface、 who felled the sacred oak tree dedicated to Thor at Geismar （in lower Hessia）、 occasioning a great fiesta for the Christians in the neighborhood to mark the defeat of their pagan competition。 Be sure to fit your special person into the story if you use it。 ［6］ 
宿	House 。 。 。 person 。 。 。 hundred。 ［11］ 
傷	Person 。 。 。 reclining 。 。 。 piggy bank。 ［13］ 
保	Person 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 tree。 ［9］ 
褒	Top hat and scarf 。 。 。 protect。 Note that the ｀tree｀ in protect becomes a wooden pole here。 ［15］ 
傑	Person 。 。 。 sunglasses 。 。 。 tree。 ［13］ 
付	Person 。 。 。 glue。 The few cases in which this character serves as a primitive should include some connotation of “adhering to” that distinguishes it from “glued to。” Two examples follow。 ［5］ 
符	Bamboo 。 。 。 adhere。 ［11］ 
府	Cave 。 。 。 adhere。 ［8］ 
任	Person 。 。 。 porter。 ［6］ 
賃	Responsibility 。 。 。 shells／money。 ［13］ 
代	Person 。 。 。 arrow。 ［5］ 
袋	Substitute 。 。 。 garment。 ［11］ 
貸	Substitute 。 。 。 shells／money。 ［12］ 
化	Person 。 。 。 spoon。 ［4］ 
花	Flower 。 。 。 change。 ［7］ 
貨	Change 。 。 。 shells。 ［11］ 
傾	Change 。 。 。 head。 The key word has the sense of leaning on or toward someone or something。 ［13］ 
何	Person 。 。 。 can。 ［7］ 
荷	Flowers 。 。 。 what。 ［10］ 
俊	Person 。 。 。 license 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［9］ 
傍	Person 。 。 。 stand 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 compass。 ［12］ 
久	This character uses the diagonal sweep of the second stroke to double up for bound up and a person。 Think of a mummy、 and the key word will not be far behind。 ［3］ 痢 痣 痩 
畝	Think of the three kinds of furrows shown here in this character—a top hat’s rim、 a rice field’s ridges、 and the wrinkles that show you’ve been around a long time。 ［10］ 
囚	Person 。 。 。 pent in。 ［5］ 
内	Person 。 。 belt。 Note that we cannot use the primitive meaning of hood here because the person runs through the element、 not under it。 ［4］ 痰 痲 
丙	Those no－frills flights the airlines off er to attract customers should help create an image from ceiling 。 。 。 person 。 。 。 belt。 The kanji meaning “inside” should not be used because of its proximity to the element for “in。” ［5］ 
柄	Tree 。 。 。 third class。 ［9］ 
肉	Let this doubling of one of the elements for “inside” yield the sense of “insides” to approach the key word、 meat。 The abbreviated form of this character gave us the primitive meaning of flesh or part of the body for the kanji 月。 ［6］ 
腐	Municipality 。 。 。 meat。 ［14］ 
座	Cave 。 。 。 assembly line 。 。 。 soil。 ［10］ 饑 饒 饕 饗 首 
卒	Top hat 。 。 。 assembly line 。 。 。 needle。 ［8］ 
傘	Umbrella 。 。 。 two assembly lines 。 。 。 needle。 ［12］ 馗 馘 香 馞 馥 
匁	This character obliges us to use a Japanese key word for want of an English equivalent。 It refers to an old unit of weight、 equal to about 3。75 grams。 The word is only slightly more useful in modern Japanese than cubits and kites are in modern English。 Its primitives、 if you look closely、 are： bound up 。 。 。 arm。 ［4］  痳 痴 痺 
以	Picture a person dragging a plow behind、 and the drop of sweat which falls from his brow as he does his work。 Think of him （or her、 for that matter） making a living “by means of the sweat of their brows。” ［5］ 
似	Be sure to keep this key word distinct from likeness （frame  100）。 Its elements： person 。 。 。 by means of。 ［7］ 
併	The sense of the key word is one of joining things together that were previously separate。 Its elements： person 。 。 。 puzzle。 ［8］ 
瓦	Ceiling 。 。 。 plow 。 。 。 fishhook 。 。 。 a drop of。 ［5］ 綮 綯 綰 綱 網 
瓶	Puzzle 。 。 。 tile。 ［11］ 
宮	Way back in Lesson 2 we learned the character for spine。 The two other characters in which it is used we can now learn together in this and the following frame。 Here a Shinto shrine is composed of house and spine。 ［10］ 
営	Schoolhouse 。 。 。 spine。 ［12］ 
善	Sheep 。 。 。 horns 。 。 。 mouth。 Pay special attention to the writing of this character。 ［12］ 綴 綵 綷 綸 
年	In an odd fashion、 the kanji for year joins together the element for horse、 on the top、 and the right half of the element for sunglasses。 Think of it as a horse wearing sunglasses with one of the lenses popped out。 We will use this latter image again、 so learn it now and save yourself the trouble later。 ［6］ 綺 綻 綽 維 綾 綿 
夜	First of all、 be sure not to confuse the connotations of night with those of evening （frame 109） and nightbreak （frame 30）。 Its elements： top hat 。 。 person 。 。 。walking legs 。 。 。 drop。 ［8］ 緇 緊 緋 総 
液	Water 。 。 。 night。 ［11］ 
塚	Soil 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 sow。 Compare frame 543。 ［12］ 
幣	Shredder 。 。 。 towel。 ［15］ 
弊	Shredder 。 。 。 two hands。 ［15］ 
喚	The mouth on the left is obvious。 The rest is harder。 Try this： four St。 Bernard dogs bound up in a bunch。 Togetherthey should supply a clear enough portrait of a yell、 provided you are careful to see all four of them。 Note how the final stroke of the four is supplied by the long horizontal stroke of the St。 Bernard。 ［12］ 
換	Fingers 。 。 。 four St。 Bernard dogs bound up。 ［12］ 
融	Ceiling 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 hood 。 。 。 human legs 。 。 。 spike 。 。 。 insect。 This is the maximum number of elements to appear in any story in the book。 ［16］ 瘠 瘡 
施	Banner 。 。 。 scorpion。 ［9］ 
旋	A banner 。 。 。 a zoo。 Hint： think of a merry－go－round。 ［11］ 
遊	Banners 。 。 。 children 。 。 。 road。 ［12］ 
旅	Let the last 4 strokes、 which are also the concluding strokes to the character for garment、 represent a rag as its primitive meaning。 We shall meet this only on one other occasion。 This gives us as our elements： banner 。 。 。 rag。 ［10］ 緑 緒 緕 緖 緘 
勿	First take the primitive meaning of this character： knot。 Think of it as the piglet minus its body （the horizontal stroke）、 that is、 the curly tail that looks like a knot。 As an exception、 we will use the homonym to remember the abstract key word、 not。 ［4］ 線 緜 緝 緞 
物	Cow 。 。 。 knot。 ［8］ 
易	Sun 。 。 。 knot。 ［8］ 
賜	Shells 。 。 。 easy。 ［15］ 
尿	Flag 。 。 。 water。 ［7］ 
尼	Flag 。 。 。 spoon。 ［5］ 
泥	Water 。 。 。 nun。 ［8］ 
塀	Soil 。 。 。 flag 。 。 。 puzzle。 ［12］ 
履	Flag 。 。 。 restore。 ［15］ 
屋	Flag 。 。 。 climax。 Note that this kanji has no relation to the drawing of a “roof” used in the primitive for house （page 82）。 ［9］ 
握	Fingers 。 。 。 roof。 ［12］ 
屈	Flag 。 。 。 exit。 ［8］ 
掘	Fingers 。 。 。 yield。 ［11］ 
堀	Soil 。 。 。 yield。 ［11］ 
居	Flag 。 。 。 old。 Do not confuse with dwell （frame 954）。 ［8］ 
据	Fingers 。 。 。 reside。 ［11］ 
層	Flag 。 。 。 increase。 ［14］ 
局	Flag 。 。 。 phrase。 Note how the flag’s long stroke doubles up for the first stroke of phrase。 ［7］ 
遅	Flag 。 。 。 sheep 。 。 。 road。 ［12］ 
漏	Water 。 。 。 flag 。 。 。 rain。 ［14］ 
刷	The key word shaku has actually come into English in the word shakuhachi、 the ancient Japanese flute that measured “one shaku and eight sun” （the “sun” being about an inch in length）。 Since the shaku is about one foot in length、 this makes about 　inches Let the final sweeping stroke be like a tape measure added to the flag。 ［4］ 艢 艤  As a primitive、 this will mean the shakuhachi flute。 
尽	Shakuhachi 。 。 。 ice。 ［6］ 
沢	Water 。 。 。 shakuhachi。 ［7］ 
訳	Words 。 。 。 shakuhachi。 ［11］ 
択	Fingers 。 。 。 shakuhachi。 ［7］ 
昼	Shakuhachi 。 。 。 nightbreak。 ［9］ 
戸	Ceiling 。 。 。 flag。 ［4］ 
肩	Door 。 。 。 flesh。 ［8］ 
房	Door 。 。 。 compass。 ［8］ 
扇	Door 。 。 。 wings。 ［10］ 
炉	Hearth fire 。 。 。 door。 ［8］ 
戻	The key word signals a “coming back” or return to some place or activity。 Its elements： door 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog。 ［7］ 
涙	Water 。 。 。 re－ 。 Do not confuse with cry （frame 432）。 ［10］ 
雇	Door 。 。 。 turkey。 Be sure to keep distinct from both employee （frame 56） and use （frame 990）。 ［12］ 
顧	Employ 。 。 。 head。 ［21］ 
啓	Door 。 。 。 taskmaster 。 。 。 mouth。 ［11］ 
示	Although the elements two and little are available for the using、 it may be easier to remember this character as a picture of an altar。 Something placed atop the altar is put on show for all to see。 ［5］  As a primitive、 this kanji means altar。 At the left 、 the abbreviated form that this element takes is made by chopping the altar in half and leaving only one dot behind to represent the right side。 The new appearance of this primitive form、 礻、 should be kept distinct from that for cloak、 衤、 identical except for the one final short stroke。 
礼	This key word refers to the polite bows and ceremonious forms of salutation so important in Japanese culture。 Its elements： altar 。 。 。 fishhook。 ［5］ 
祥	Altar 。 。 。 sheep。 ［10］ 
祝	Altar 。 。 。 teenager。 ［9］ 
福	Altar 。 。 。 wealth。 ［13］ 
祉	Altar 。 。 。 footprint。 ［8］ 
社	Altar 。 。 。 soil。 The company referred to here is that of the modern business world。 ［7］ 
視	Altar 。 。 。 see。 ［11］ 
奈	We choose the city of Nara as the key word in this case because this kanji、 frequently used in proper names、 appears in Nara； and also because of Nara’s famed religious monuments、 which help us with the primitives： St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 altar。 ［8］ 
尉	Flag 。 。 。 altar 。 。 。 glue。 ［11］ 
慰	Military officer 。 。 。 heart。 ［15］ 
款	Samurai 。 。 。 altar 。 。 。 yawning。 ［12］ 
禁	Grove 。 。 。 altar。 ［13］ 
襟	Cloak 。 。 。 prohibition。 ［18］ 
宗	House 。 。 。 altar。 ［8］ 
崇	Mountain 。 。 。 religion。 ［11］ 
祭	Flesh 。 。 。 crotch 。 。 。 altar。 Note how the second element is cut short、 giving a tent－like eff ect to the character。 ［11］ 
察	“Guess” here has the sense of a measured conjecture。 Its elements： house 。 。 。 ritual。 ［14］ 
擦	Fingers 。 。 。 guess。 ［17］ 
由	The “wherefore” of this kanji explains the reason or origin of a thing。 It does this graphically by depicting a seed in a rice field sending up a single sprout、 which is the whole why and wherefore of the seed’s falling in the earth and dying。 （When the flower appears、 you will recall from frame 234、 we have a full seedling。） ［5］ 饉 饋 饌 饐  As a primitive、 in conformity to the explanation above、 this kanji will be taken to mean shoot or sprout。 
抽	Fingers 。 。 。 sprout。 ［8］ 
油	Water 。 。 。 sprout。 ［8］ 
袖	Cloak 。 。 。 sprout。 ［10］ 
宙	House 。 。 。 shoot。 ［8］ 
届	Flag 。 。 。 sprout。 ［8］ 
笛	Bamboo 。 。 。 sprout。 ［11］ 
軸	Car 。 。 。 shoot。 ［12］ 
甲	This kanji reverses the element for sprout、 giving the image of roots being sent down into the earth by a seed planted in the rice field。 From there you must invent a connection to the key word、 armor。 ［5］ 瘻 療  The primitive meaning is roots。Important to that word is the image of “pushing downwards、” as roots do。 
押	Fingers 。 。 。 roots。 Compare and contrast with pluck （frame  1106）。 ［8］ 
岬	Like the cape （frame 153） and the promontory （frame 778）、 the headland refers to a jut of land。 Its elements： mountain 。 。 。 roots。 ［8］ 
挿	Fingers 。 。 。 thousand 。 。 。 roots。 Observe how the writing order does not follow the elements in order、 because the final stroke is used for two diff erent elements。 ［10］ 締 緡 緤 編 
申	The olde English is used here to indicate a humble form of the third person singular of the verb “to speak。” It is written by a tongue wagging in the mouth with a walking stick rammed through it and coming out at both ends。 ［5］ 癆 癇 
伸	Person 。 。 。 monkey。 ［7］ 
神	Altar 。 。 。 monkey。 ［9］ 
捜	Fingers 。 。 。 monkey 。 。 。 crotch。 ［10］ 
果	The final stage of the seed is reached when the plant has reached its full growth （the tree） and comes to fruition、 producing fruit full of new seeds that can return to the earth and start the process all over again。 The main thing to notice here is the element for brains at the top、 which might prove more helpful than rice field for creating an image。 ［8］ 
菓	Flowers 。 。 。 fruits。 ［11］ 
課	Words 。 。 。 fruit。 ［15］ 
裸	Cloak 。 。 。 fruit。 ［13］ 
斤	This character represents a picture of an ax、 the two vertical lines being the handle and the horizontal strokes of the blade。 Note the writing order carefully。 ［4］ 癈 癌 癒 癖 
析	Tree 。 。 。 ax。 ［8］ 
所	Door 。 。 。 ax。 ［8］ 
祈	Altar 。 。 。 ax。 ［8］ 
近	Ax 。 。 。 road。 Be careful not to confuse with draw near （frame  192） or bystander （frame 1015）。 ［7］ 
折	Fingers 。 。 。 ax。 Hint： make an image out of the Japanese art of “origami” （paper－folding）。 ［7］ 
哲	Fold 。 。 。 mouth。 ［10］ 
逝	The connotation is of a “dearly departed” who has passed away。 The elements： fold 。 。 。 road。 ［10］ 
誓	Fold 。 。 。 words。 ［14］ 
暫	Car 。 。 。 ax 。 。 。 days。 ［15］ 
漸	Water 。 。 。 car 。 。 。 ax。 ［14］ 
断	Fishhook 。 。 。 rice 。 。 。 ax。 ［11］ 
質	Two axes 。 。 。 shells。 ［15］ 
斥	Ax 。 。 。 a drop of。 ［5］ 
訴	Words 。 。 。 reject。 ［12］ 
昨	Day 。 。 。 saw。 ［9］ 
詐	The lie in this character refers to falsehoods and fibs。 Its elements： words 。 。 。 saw。 ［12］ 
作	Person 。 。 。 saw。 ［7］  ⺕ broom The pictographic representation here is of the bristles on the head of a broom。 ［3］ 癘 癜 癡 
雪	Rain that undergoes a change so that it can be swept aside with a broom is snow。 ［11］ 
録	Metal 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 grains of rice。 Note how the final stroke of the broom is extended slightly when an element below is attached directly to it。 ［16］ 
尋	Broom 。 。 。 craft 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 glue。 ［12］ 
急	Bound up 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 heart。 ［9］ 
穏	Wheat 。 。 。 vulture 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 heart。 ［16］ 
侵	Person 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 crotch。 Gather the elements on the right into a composite image that can serve you in the next two frames。 ［9］ 
浸	Water 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 crotch。 ［10］ 
寝	Do not confuse this key word with either the element for reclining or the character for prostrated （frame 962）。 Its primitive elements are： house 。 。 。 turtle 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 crotch。 ［13］ 
婦	Woman 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 apron。 ［11］ 
掃	Fingers 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 apron。 ［11］ 
当	Little 。 。 。 broom。 ［6］ 
争	Bound up 。 。 。 rake。 ［6］ 
浄	Water 。 。 。 contend。 ［9］ 
事	This key word here refers to abstract matters。 The elements are： one 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 rake。 Note how the rake handle reaches out the top and bottom of the character。 ［8］ 
唐  T’ang The key word here refers of course to the T’ang Dynasty in China （and not to the name of the drink astronauts take with them into outer space、 though this could be useful for the next frame）。 Its elements： cave 。 。 。 rake 。 。 。 mouth。 ［10］ 
糖	Rice 。 。 。 T’ang。 ［16］ 
康	Cave 。 。 。 sieve。 ［11］ 
逮	Think of apprehending criminals。 The elements are： sieve 。 。 。 road。 ［11］ 
伊	Used chiefly in proper names、 and given the sound “i、” this kanji can be remembered as an abbreviation of Italy、 for which it is still used today in Japan。 Its primitives： person 。 。 。 mop。 ［6］ 
君	The somewhat highbrow British term of address is chosen here to represent the kanji for a form of address used towards one’s juniors。 It is composed of： mop 。 。 。 mouth。 ［7］ 
群	Old boys 。 。 。 sheep。 ［13］ 
耐	The key word is a suffix used to indicate “safe from” or “protected against、” as in the words rustproof、 waterproof、 and fireproof。 It is composed of： comb 。 。 。 glue。 ［9］ 
需	The sense of demand is best captured by thinking of the economic principle of “supply and demand。” The primitives： rain 。 。 。 comb。 ［14］ 
儒	Person 。 。 。 demand。 ［16］ 
端	Vase 。 。 。 mountain 。 。 。 comb。 ［14］ 
両	Ceiling 。 。 。 belt 。 。 。 mountain。 Note that the writing order follows the order in which the primitives are given here。 ［6］ 
満	Water 。 。 。 flowers 。 。 。 both。 Given the abstract nature of this last primitive、 you may want to borrow the image from the previous frame。 ［12］ 
画	In forming an image for the key word、 it is helpful to know that this kanji is used for artistic representations such as completed paintings、 as well as for the number of brush－strokes in a character （as、 for instance、 in Indexes ii and iii at the end of this book）。 Its elements are： ceiling 。 。 。 sprout 。 。 。 shovel。 ［8］ 皿 盂 的 皆 皇 
歯	Footprint 。 。 。 rice 。 。 。 shovel。 ［12］ 
曲	Picture yourself grabbing hold of the two strokes poking out the top of the kanji and wrenching them apart、 thus giving the sense of bend。 If you think of them as deriving from the element for brains beneath （of course、 the middle stroke has been reduplicated and pulled out to where it can be grabbed hold of）、 you can associate the key word with bending someone’s mind to your own point of view。 ［6］ 
曹	This character is written in the order of its elements： one 。 。 。 bend 。 。 。 sun。 ［11］ 
遭	Cadet 。 。 。 road。 ［14］ 
漕	Water 。 。 。 cadet。 ［14］ 
槽	Tree 。 。 。 cadet。 ［15］ 
斗	The Big Dipper here is of course the constellation of Ursa Major、 of which this kanji is a sort of pictographic representation。 ［4］ 皈 皋 皎 皐  Since we already have a primitive element for a “dipper”— namely、 the ladle—we shall let this one stand for a measuring cup。 By the way、 it would make a rather large one、 since the kanji is also used for a measure of about 18 liters！ 
料	Measuring cup 。 。 。 rice。 ［10］ 
科	Think here of the faculty or department you entered in university、 using the elements： measuring cup 。 。 。 wheat。 ［9］ 
図	Pent in 。 。 。 Big Dipper。 Hint： among the songs dating from the days of slavery that have become part of American folklore is one called “Follow the Drinking Gourd。” It referred to the nighttime travel of runaway slaves （those pent in） who had no maps other than the stars to guide them、 among them the bright and predominant Big Dipper、 the “Drinking Gourd。” ［7］ 
用	Meat 。 。 。 walking stick。 Be sure to keep this key word distinct from that for use （frame 990）。 The stroke order is exactly as you would expect it from the order of the primitive elements as given。 ［5］  As a primitive element、 we shall substitute the image of a screwdriver、 perhaps the most utilized of all tools around the house。 
庸	Cave 。 。 。 rake 。 。 。 screwdriver。 ［11］ 
備	Person 。 。 。 flowers 。 。 。 cliff 。 。 。 screwdriver。 In cases like this you can jumble up the primitive into any order that seems best for the composition of a story、 provided you feel confident about the relative position that those primitives take to one another in the completed character。 ［12］ 
昔	Salad 。 。 。 days。 This is the character with which Japanese fairy tales commonly begin。 ［8］ 
錯	Metal 。 。 。 once upon a time。 ［16］ 
借	Person 。 。 。 once upon a time。 ［10］ 
惜	State of mind 。 。 。 once upon a time。 The sense of the key word is that of a lost opportunity or bad turn of aff airs、 as in the phrase “What a pity！” ［11］ 
措	Fingers 。 。 。 once upon a time。 ［11］ 
散	Salad 。 。 。 flesh 。 。 taskmaster。 ［12］ 
廿	The two tens joined at the bottom by a short line is actually the old character for twenty、 which we might as well learn since we need its primitive form。 It is written the same as salad、 except for the shorter final stroke。 ［4］ 綢 綣 綫 綬 
庶	Caverns 。 。 。 oven fire。 ［11］ 
遮	Commoner 。 。 。 road。 ［14］ 
席	Caverns 。 。 。 towel。 ［10］ 
度	This key word refers to a gradation of measurement、 not to academic diplomas。 Its primitives： caverns 。 。 。 crotch。 ［9］ 
渡	Water 。 。 。 degrees。 ［12］ 
奔	The hustle and bustle of this character is depicted by a St。 Bernard dog and a haystack。 ［8］ 
噴	Mouth 。 。 。 haystack 。 。 。 clams。 ［15］ 
墳	Soil 。 。 。 haystack 。 。 。 clams。 In order not to confuse this kanji with that for a grave （frame 231）、 something like the image of an Egyptian tomb should be adopted、 with all its special connotations。 ［15］ 
憤	State of mind 。 。 。 haystack 。 。 。 clams。 ［15］ 
焼	Hearth 。 。 。 straw man。 Take care to distinguish this kanji from cook （frame 468） and burn （frame 510） when you compose your story。 ［12］ 
暁	Sun 。 。 。 straw man。 ［12］ 
半	Although the writing order is diff erent、 one can remember the appearance of this character by seeing it as a little needle—the kind used for splitting hairs in half。 （Again、 according to rule、 little takes a stroke beneath it in order to be placed over an element that has no horizontal line at the top。） ［5］ 网 罔 罕 罘 罟 
伴	Person 。 。 。 half。 ［7］ 
畔	Rice field 。 。 。 half。 The key word here refers to the ridges that rise up between the sections of a rice paddy。 ［10］ 
判	Half 。 。 。 saber。 You might recall the famous judgment of King Solomon、 who off ered to slice a baby in two with a saber to give half to each of the mothers who claimed it as her own。 ［7］ 
券	Quarter 。 。 。 dagger。 ［8］ 
巻	Quarter 。 。 。 snake。 The key word refers to a manuscript rolled up into a scroll、 not to a hanging scroll （frame 407）。 ［9］ 
圏	This key word refers to a realm or orbit、 not to a ball。 Its elements： pent in 。 。 。 scroll。 ［12］ 
勝	Moon 。 。 。 quarter 。 。 。 muscle。 ［12］ 
藤	Flower 。 。 。 moon 。 。 。 quarter 。 。 。 rice grains。 ［18］ 
謄	Moon 。 。 。 quarter 。 。 。 words。 ［17］ 
片	This kanji is based on the pictograph of a tree with some branches going upwards and others hanging down、 split right down the middle。 When that picture’s right side is isolated、 it becomes the kanji for one－sided、 in the sense of only one part of a whole。 ［4］ 皞 皦 皮 皰 
版	Although this character also carries the sense of an “edition” of a publication、 the elements、 one－sided and anti－、 more readily suggest its other meaning of a printing block。 ［8］ 
之	This character is now used chiefly in proper names、 and is best learned as the character closest to the hiragana え、 though in fact it has no relation to it。 ［3］  In order to give this kanji a more concrete meaning when it is used as a primitive element、 think of it as referring to building blocks with the hiragana written on them、 much the same as the a－b－c blocks you played with as a child。 
乏	Drop of 。 。 。 building blocks。 ［4］ 
芝	Flowers 。 。 。 building blocks。 ［6］ 
不	You may play with the primitives of this kanji as you wish （ceiling 。 。 。 person 。 。 。 a drop of）、 but you will probably find that its simplicity、 and its frequency、 make it easy to remember just as it is。 ［4］ 練 緻 縁 縄 
否	Negative 。 。 。 mouth。 ［7］ 
杯	Tree 。 。 。 negative。 ［8］ 
矢	When shot high into the heavens、 the dart gets so small it looks like a mere drop。 Although this character could as well mean “arrow、” it has no connection with the primitive of that meaning。 Hence the new key word。 ［5］ 
矯	Dart 。 。 。 angel。 Compare your stories for correct （frame 379）、 revise （frame 339）、 and reformation （frame 528）。 ［17］ 
族	Banner 。 。 。 dart。 ［11］ 
知	Dart 。 。 。 mouth。 ［8］ 
智	Know 。 。 。 sun。 ［12］ 
矛	The halberd’s battle－ax head and long shaft are depicted here。 Take care with the number and order of the strokes。 ［5］ 皴 皷 皸 皹 皺 
柔	Halberd 。 。 。 tree。 ［9］ 
務	Halberd 。 。 。 taskmaster 。 。 。 muscle。 ［11］ 
霧	Weather／rain 。 。 。 task。 ［19］ 
班	Spear 。 。 。 two balls。 ［10］ 
帰	Spear 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 apron。 The character for lady （frame 1151） shares the same right side as this character、 which does not bode for a very happy homecoming。 ［10］ 
弓	This character pictures the bent wooden bow。 Later we will learn how to make the bowstring that goes with it （frame 1386）。 If you stretch this character out and see the indentation on the left as its handle、 the pictography should be clearer。 ［3］ 纎 纏 纐 
引	Bow 。 。 。 walking stick。 ［4］ 
弔	A bow 。 。 。 wrapped around a walking stick。 ［4］ 
弘	Bow 。 。 。 elbow。 ［5］ 
強	Vast 。 。 。 insect。 Note how the elbow of vast is shrunken and elevated to make room for the insect beneath。 ［11］ 
弱	Two bows 。 。 with ice on them。 ［10］  dollar sign 弗 Composed of two walking sticks running through a bow、 this character is infrequent as a primitive、 and yet easy to remember for what it looks like （which is also what the Japanese adopted it to mean in days gone by）： the dollar sign、 ＄。 When it is written under another element、 the first vertical stroke is abbreviated to a short “tail” as the final stroke、 and the second vertical stroke is cut off at the top。 Examples follow in frames ［5］ 盆 盈 益 盍 
沸	Water 。 。 。 dollar sign。 ［8］ 
費	Dollar sign 。 。 。 shells／money。 ［12］ 
第	 The key word No。 is the abbreviation for “number。” Its elements： bamboo 。 。 。 dollar sign。 ［11］ 
弟	Horns 。 。 。 dollar sign。 ［7］ 
巧	Craft 。 。 。 snare。 ［5］ 
号	Mouth 。 。 。 snare。 ［5］ 
朽	Tree 。 。 。 snare。 Do not confuse with rot （frame 1023）。 ［6］ 
誇	Words 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 snare。 ［13］ 
汚	Water 。 。 。 two 。 。 。 snare。 Note that the first stroke for snare doubles up with the first stroke for two。 ［6］ 盗 盛 盜 
与	Slingshot 。 。 。 one。 Later on we shall learn the character for give （frame 1897）、 but even at this point it is a good idea to distinguish this key word from impart （frame 736） and grant （frame  1052）。 ［3］ 盞 盟 
写	Crown 。 。 。 bestow。 ［5］ 
身	The key word somebody was chosen to convey the double meaning of this kanji： body and person。 Its composition is based on the nose （which、 you will recall、 is also the kanji for oneself）。 The extension of the bottom and far right strokes of that element、 together with the unusual diagonal stroke、 forms the pictograph of somebody with a prominent paunch。 ［7］ 盡 監 盤 盥 盧 盪 目 
射	“I shot an arrow into the air、 And it landed I know not where” goes the poem。 （The poor poet obviously loses a lot of arrows。） This kanji、 however、 tells us where it did land。 Its elements： somebody 。 。 。 glued to。 ［10］ 
謝	Words 。 。 。 shoot。 ［17］ 
老	First、 do not confuse this character with venerable old man （frame 786）、 which is far more rarely used。 The character for an old man begins with an abbreviation of the character for somebody、 the nose having been shortened into a simple crisscross of lines。 But there is another、 simpler way to remember it all： the soil drawn first indicates that one has come close to the age when “dust to dust” begins to take on a personal meaning； the diagonal walking stick for getting around； and the spoon for being spoon－fed。 ［6］ 盲 直 相  As a primitive、 the meaning is the same、 but the final two strokes are omitted so that they can be replaced with other elements： 臘。 
考	Old man 。 。 。 slingshot。 Remember： you already have kanji for discriminating （frame 482）、 deliberation （frame 642）、 and think （frame 605）。 ［6］ 
孝	Old man 。 。 。 child。 ［7］ 
教	Filial piety 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［11］ 
拷	Fingers 。 。 。 consider。 ［9］ 
者	Old man 。 。 。 sun。 This key word looks difficult because of its proximity to somebody。 In fact、 it is a very common kanji that will cause you no difficulty at all。 Its meaning should be seen as the human referent for the abstract noun “something。” ［8］  As a primitive it means a puppet－on－a－string。 
煮	Puppet 。 。 。 oven fire。 ［12］ 
著	Flowers 。 。 。 puppet。 ［11］ 
署	Eye 。 。 。 puppet。 ［13］ 
暑	The key word refers to the heat of summer。 Its elements： sun 。 。 。 puppet。 ［12］ 
諸	Words 。 。 。 puppet。 Do not confuse with miscellaneous （frame  562）。 ［15］ 
猪	Pack of wild dogs 。 。 。 puppet。 ［11］ 
渚	The strand referred to here is the stretch of land along a beach or shoreline。 Its elements are： water 。 。 。 puppet。 ［11］ 
賭	Shells／money 。 。 。 puppet。 ［15］ 
峡	Mountain 。 。 。 scissors。 ［9］ 
狭	Pack of wild dogs 。 。 。 scissors。 ［9］ 
挟	Fingers 。 。 。 scissors。 Do not confuse with the kanji for pinch （frame 657）。 ［9］ 
追	Maestro 。 。 。 road。 ［9］ 
師	Maestro 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 towel。 ［10］ 
帥	Maestro 。 。 。 towel。 ［9］ 
官	By replacing the maestro’s baton （the drop） with the roof of a house、 we have his equivalent in the institutional world of big government： the bureaucrat。 ［8］ 
棺	Wood 。 。 。 bureaucrat。 ［12］ 
管	Bamboo 。 。 。 bureaucrat。 ［14］ 
父	The kindness and hard work of the ideal father is seen in this abbreviation of the taskmaster that leaves off his rod or whip （the first stroke） and replaces it with the sweat of the father’s brow （the two drops at the top）。 ［4］ 眞 真 眠 眤 
交	Top hat 。 。 。 father。 ［6］ 
効	Mingle 。 。 。 power。 Note the distinct connotations that separate merit from achievement （frame 863）。 ［8］ 
較	Cars 。 。 。 mingle。 ［13］ 
校	Tree 。 。 。 mingle。 ［10］ 
足	Mouth 。 。 。 mending。 Note that the last stroke of mouth and the first of mending overlap。 ［7］  As a primitive on the left、 it is amended to 脣。 Its meaning remains leg、 but should be thought of as a wooden leg in order to avoid confusion with other similar elements、 namely human legs、 animal legs、 and walking legs。 
促	Person 。 。 。 leg。 ［9］ 
距	Wooden leg 。 。 。 gigantic。 ［12］ 
路	Wooden leg 。 。 。 each。 ［13］ 
露	Rain 。 。 。 path。 ［21］ 
跳	Wooden leg 。 。 。 portent。 ［13］ 
躍	Wooden leg 。 。 。 feathers 。 。 。 turkey。 ［21］ 
践	Wooden leg 。 。 。 parade float。 ［13］ 
踏	The meaning of this character is virtually identical with that of the last frame。 Be sure to come up with distinct connotations suggested by phrases in which each is commonly used。 Wooden leg 。 。 。 water 。 。 。 sun。 ［15］ 
骨	This kanji and primitive refers to the part of the body composed of the bones and their joints。 The top part of the kanji、 terminating in the element for crown、 is a pictograph of a bone joint。 I leave it to you to put the pieces together、 so to speak。 ［10］ 眥 眦 眩 眷 眸 眺 
滑	Water 。 。 。 skeleton。 ［13］ 
髄	Skeleton 。 。 。 possess 。 。 。 road。 ［19］ 
禍	Altar 。 。 。 jawbone。 ［13］ 
渦	Water 。 。 。 jawbone。 ［12］ 
過	Jawbone 。 。 。 road。 ［12］ 
阪	This character is used for proper names、 much as the English word “Heights” is。 Its primitives： pinnacle 。 。 。 anti－。 ［7］ 
阿	This kanji、 an abbreviation for Africa、 is now used chiefly for its sound、 “a、” not unlike the kanji for Italy and the sound “i” that we met earlier （frame 1161）。 Its composite elements are： pinnacle 。 。 。 can。 ［8］ 
際	Pinnacle 。 。 。 ritual。 ［14］ 
障	Pinnacle 。 。 。 badge。 ［14］ 
随	Pinnacle 。 。 。 possess 。 。 。 road。 ［12］ 
陪	Pinnacle 。 。 。 muzzle。 ［11］ 
陽	Diff erent from the primitive for sun （which figures in the character） and the kanji for ray （frame 119）、 the key word sunshine is meant to convey the meaning of the masculine principle in nature、 or “Yang。” （The dark is viewed mythically as the feminine principle； see frame 1592。） From there it comes to mean sun also。 The elements are： pinnacle 。 。 。 piggy bank。 ［12］ 
陳	Pinnacle 。 。 。 east。 ［11］ 
防	Pinnacle 。 。 。 compass。 ［7］ 
附	Pinnacle 。 。 。 adhere。 ［8］ 
院	 This key word、 the abbreviation for Institution、 represents the use of that word as a suffix affixed to certain buildings and organizations。 Its primitive elements： pinnacle 。 。 。 perfect。 ［10］ 
陣	Pinnacle 。 。 。 car。 ［10］ 
隊	Pinnacle 。 。 。 animal horns 。 。 。 sow。 ［12］ 
墜	Regiment 。 。 。 ground。 ［15］ 
降	Pinnacle 。 。 。 walking legs 。 。 。 sunglasses with a lens popped out。 Distinguish from fall （frame 299） and crash、 which we considered in the previous frame。 ［10］ 
階	The story of this character refers to s in a building。 The elements： pinnacle 。 。 。 all。 ［12］ 
陛	This key word indicates a title of address to royalty。 Its elements： pinnacle 。 。 。 compare 。 。 。 ground。 ［10］ 
隣	Pinnacle 。 。 。 rice 。 。 。 sunglasses。 ［16］ 
隔	Pinnacle 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 glass canopy 。 。 。 human legs 。 。 。 spike。 You might want to compare the kanji for dissolve （frame  1044）。 ［13］ 
隠	Pinnacle 。 。 。 vulture 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 heart。 Compare the elements at the right to the kanji for calm （frame 1147）。 ［14］ 
堕	Pinnacle 。 。 。 possess 。 。 。 ground。 ［12］ 
陥	Pinnacle 。 。 。 bound up 。 。 。 olden times。 ［10］ 
穴	House 。 。 。 eight。 ［5］  As a primitive、 this kanji uses an alternate form： the primitive for eight is replaced with that for human legs。 
空	Hole 。 。 。 craft。 ［8］ 
控	Fingers 。 。 。 empty。 ［11］ 
突	Hole 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog。 ［8］ 
究	Hole 。 。 。 baseball。 ［7］ 
窒	Hole 。 。 。 climax。 ［11］ 
窃	Hole 。 。 。 cut。 ［9］ 
窪	Hole 。 。 。 water 。 。 。 ivy。 The depression referred to here is a sunken place in the ground、 rather than in one’s spirits。 ［14］ 
搾	Fingers 。 。 。 hole 。 。 。 saw。 ［13］ 
窯	Hole 。 。 。 sheep 。 。 。 oven fire。 ［15］ 
窮	Hole 。 。 。 somebody 。 。 。 bow。 ［15］ 
探	Fingers 。 。 。 paper punch 。 。 。 tree。 ［11］ 
深	Water 。 。 。 paper punch 。 。 。 tree。 ［11］ 
丘	Since this supposedly pictographic representation of a hill looks like anything but、 picture a row of axes driven into the ground up to their heads、 and see if that doesn’t present you with a more memorable image of hill—at least a riskier one sliding down！ ［5］ 
岳	Think of the key word as referring to proper names of mountains、 but do not confuse with mountain peak （frame 773）。 The elements are： hill 。 。 。 mountain。 ［8］ 
兵	Hill 。 。 。 animal legs。 ［7］ 
浜	Water 。 。 。 soldier。 ［10］ 
糸	Remember when your granny used to ask you to bend your arms at the elbows and hold them out so that she could use them like a rack to hold a skein of string or yarn （here thread） while she rolled it up into a little ball？ Now can you see the two elbows （with the second stroke doubling up） at the top、 and the character for little below？ ［6］ 睇 睚 睛 睡 督 睥 
織	Thread 。 。 。 kazoo。 ［18］ 
繕	Thread 。 。 。 virtuous。 ［18］ 
縮	Thread 。 。 。 inn。 ［17］ 
繁	Cleverness 。 。 。 thread。 ［16］ 
縦	Thread 。 。 。 accompany。 ［16］ 
線	Thread 。 。 。 spring。 ［15］ 
締	Thread 。 。 。 sovereign。 ［15］ 
維	Thread 。 。 。 turkey。 ［14］ 
羅	Eye 。 。 。 fiber。 ［19］ 
練	Thread 。 。 。 east。 ［14］ 
緒	Thread 。 。 。 puppet。 Although we usually think of a thong as coming at the end of a piece of string、 this character’s meaning allows for it to come at the beginning as well。 ［14］ 
続	Thread 。 。 。 sell。 ［13］ 
絵	Thread 。 。 。 meeting。 ［12］ 
統	Thread 。 。 。 allot。 ［12］ 
絞	Thread 。 。 。 mingle。 ［12］ 
給	Thread 。 。 。 fit。 ［12］ 
絡	Thread 。 。 。 each。 ［12］ 
結	Thread 。 。 。 aerosol can。 ［12］ 
終	Thread 。 。 。 winter。 ［11］ 
級	Threads 。 。 。 outstretched hands。 ［9］ 
紀	Thread 。 。 。 snake。 ［9］ 
紅	Thread 。 。 。 craft。 ［9］ 
納	Thread 。 。 。 inside。 ［10］ 
紡	For the kanji that means the spinning of thread and other fibers we have the elements： thread 。 。 。 compass。 ［10］ 
紛	Thread 。 。 。 part。 ［10］ 
紹	Thread 。 。 。 seduce。 ［11］ 
経	 Thread 。 。 。 spool。 ［11］ 
紳	Thread 。 。 。 monkey。 ［11］ 
約	Consider for a moment the etymology of the word “promise” in order to notice its roots in the activity of putting one thing （e。g。、 one’s word of honor） in place of another （e。g。、 the fulfillment of a task）。 For as it turns out、 this character also means “to abridge、 economize、 and abbreviate”—all activities that involve putting one thing in place of another。 With that in mind、 we may now work with the elements： thread 。 。 。 ladle。 ［9］ 
細	Thread 。 。 。 brains。 ［11］ 
累	Rice field 。 。 。 threads。 Make use of the position of the elements to distinguish this kanji from that of the previous frame。 ［11］ 
索	Needle 。 。 。 a crown 。 。 。 thread。 ［10］ 
総	This kanji、 meaning universal or widespread、 is composed of three elements： thread 。 。 。 public 。 。 。 heart。 ［14］ 
綿	Thread 。 。 。 white 。 。 。 towels。 ［14］ 
絹	Thread 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 flesh。 ［13］ 
繰	Thread 。 。 。 goods 。 。 。 tree。 ［19］ 
継	Thread 。 。 。 rice 。 。 。 fishhook。 Compare frame 1136。 ［13］ 
緑	Thread 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 rice grains。 ［14］ 
縁	Thread 。 。 。 broom 。 。 。 sow。 ［15］ 
網	Thread 。 。 。 glass canopy 。 。 。 animal horns 。 。 。 perish。 ［14］ 
緊	Slave 。 。 。 crotch 。 。 。 thread。 ［15］ 
紫	Footprint 。 。 。 spoon 。 。 。 thread。 ［12］ 
縛	Threads 。 。 。 acupuncturist。 ［16］ 
縄	Thread 。 。 。 eels。 ［15］ 
幼	Cocoon 。 。 。 muscle。 ［5］ 
後	Line 。 。 。 cocoon 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［9］ 
幽	Two cocoons 。 。 。 mountain。 Observe how the two vertical strokes of the mountain are extended upwards to serve as a kind of enclosure。 ［9］ 縣 縦 縫 縮 縱 
幾	Two cocoons 。 。 。 person 。 。 。 fiesta。 ［12］ 睦 睨 睫 睹  As a primitive、 this kanji will mean an abacus、 the beadinstrument used in the Orient to calculate how many。 
機	Tree 。 。 。 abacus。 ［16］ 
玄	Top hat 。 。 。 cocoon。 ［5］ 
畜	Mysterious 。 。 。 rice field。 ［10］ 
蓄	Flowers 。 。 。 livestock。 ［13］ 
弦	Bow 。 。 。 mysterious。 ［8］ 
擁	Fingers 。 。 。 mysterious 。 。 。 turkey。 Note that the top hat is extended across both elements、 though it belongs only to the cocoon。 This means that you may either use mysterious—as we did here—or take the three elements separately。 ［16］ 
滋	Water 。 。 。 double－mysterious。 Note the doubling up of the element for top hat in the primitive for mysterious and assign it a special image、 as it will come up in the next two frames。 ［12］ 
慈	Double－mysterious 。 。 。 heart。 ［13］ 
磁	Stone 。 。 。 double－mysterious。 ［14］ 
系	The single stroke added to the beginning of the primitive for thread gives the image of threads woven into a single cord。 Hence the meaning、 lineage。 ［7］  As a primitive、 we shall give this kanji the meaning of yarn、 as the uniting of many threads into a single strand is most obvious with yarn。 
係	Person 。 。 。 yarn。 ［9］ 
孫	Child 。 。 。 yarn。 ［10］ 
懸	Prefecture 。 。 。 yarn 。 。 。 heart。 ［20］ 
却	Gone 。 。 。 stamp。 ［7］ 
脚	Part of the body 。 。 。 instead。 This character has more or less the same meaning as that for legs learned back in frame 1279。 It can also indicate the part of the legs from the shins down、 which explains the choice of the key word。 ［11］ 
卸	The left primitive is a union of a horse and footprint。 To the right、 the stamp。 ［9］ 縲 縵 縶 縷 縹 
御	Line 。 。 。 wholesale。 ［12］ 
服	Flesh 。 。 。 stamp 。 。 。 crotch。 Note how the stamp is stretched out here。 ［8］ 
命	This character connotes life in general、 but also the particular life to which one is fated by virtue of the distinctive character with which one is born。 Its elements are： fit 。 。 。 stamp。 The bottom portion of fit is nudged to the left in order to make room for the stamp。 ［8］ 
令	Meeting 。 。 。 chop－seal。 ［5］ 
零	Rain 。 。 。 orders。 ［13］ 
齢	This character is used to express the years of one’s age。 Its elements： teeth 。 。 。 orders。 ［17］ 
冷	Ice 。 。 。 orders。 ［7］ 
領	Orders 。 。 。 head。 ［14］ 
鈴	Gold 。 。 。 orders。 ［13］ 
勇	Chop－seal 。 。 。 male。 ［9］ 
通	Chop－seal 。 。 。 utilize 。 。 。 road。 By combining the first two primitives into a single image、 you will be able to use that image in a few instances later、 one of which comes immediately。 ［10］ 
踊	Wooden leg 。 。 。 chop－seal 。 。 。 utilize。 ［14］ 
疑	Spoon 。 。 。 dart 。 。 。 chop－seal 。 。 。 zoo。 ［14］ 
擬	Fingers 。 。 。 doubt。 ［17］ 
凝	Ice 。 。 。 doubt。 ［16］ 
範	Bamboo 。 。 。 car 。 。 。 fingerprint。 ［15］ 
犯	Wild dogs 。 。 。 fingerprint。 ［5］ 
厄	Cliff 。 。 。 fingerprint。 ［4］ 
危	Bound up 。 。 。 unlucky。 ［6］ 
宛	House 。 。 。 mailbox。 ［8］ 
腕	Part of the body 。 。 。 address。 ［12］ 
苑	Flowers 。 。 。 mailbox。 ［8］ 
怨	Mailbox 。 。 。 heart。 ［9］ 
柳	Tree 。 。 。 receipt 。 。 。 stamp。 ［9］ 
卵	Receipt 。 。 。 stamp 。 。 。 and a drop in each side to represent a little smear of egg yoke。 The third stroke is drawn slightly higher to close the egg up tightly and keep the yoke inside。 ［7］ 馭 馮 馳 馴 馼 駁 駄 
留	Receipt 。 。 。 dagger 。 。 。 rice field。 ［10］ 
貿	Receipt 。 。 。 dagger 。 。 。 shells。 Do not confuse with make a deal （frame 439） or wholesale （frame 1397）。 ［12］ 
印	At last we come to the general character meaning stamp。 Its elements： staples 。 。 。 stamp。 ［6］ 
興	Here we see a wheel of fortune that has been tampered with。 On both sides you see the staples separating one number’s slot from the next、 and between them the character for the same— indicating that it has been rigged to repeat the same number。 The tool below refers to the wheel itself。 A dandy form of entertainment、 especially if you are the owner of the wheel。 ［16］ 
酉	Though we shall later encounter the kanji for bird、 we introduce this one for the tenth sign of the zodiac mainly because of its use as a primitive、 where it has a diff erent meaning。 ［7］ 瞹 瞻 瞼 瞽 瞿 矇 矍  As a primitive、 it means whiskey bottle。 In its pictograph、 you can see the loosely corked lid、 the bottle、 and the contents 
酒	 Water 。 。 。 whiskey bottle。 ［10］ 
酌	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 ladle。 ［10］ 
酵	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 filial piety。 ［14］ 
酷	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 revelation。 ［14］ 
酬	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 state。 ［13］ 
酪	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 each。 ［13］ 
酢	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 saw。 ［12］ 
酔	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 baseball 。 。 。 needle。 ［11］ 
配	Whisky bottle 。 。 。 snake。 ［10］ 
酸	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 license 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［14］ 
猶	Wild dogs 。 。 。 animal horns 。 。 。 whiskey bottle。 ［12］ 
尊	Animal horns 。 。 。 whiskey bottle 。 。 。 glue。 ［12］ 
豆	This kanji depicts a pot of beans、 although it looks more like a table on which the pot is resting。 ［7］ 矗 矚 矛 矜  As a primitive、 this kanji will also mean table。 
頭	Here we meet at last the full kanji on which the primitive for head is based。 The elements： table 。 。 。 head。 ［16］ 
短	Dart 。 。 。 table。 ［12］ 
豊	Bend 。 。 。 table。 Think of a bountiful harvest、 and you will not be far from the meaning of this character。 ［13］ 
鼓	The full kanji for the drum adds a branch、 apparently to serve as a drumstick、 to the primitive for drum。 ［13］ 
喜	Drum 。 。 。 mouth。 ［12］ 
樹	Trees 。 。 。 drum 。 。 。 glue。 ［16］ 
皿	The kanji for a dish is、 clearly、 the pictograph of a painted or carved bowl、 seen from the side。 ［5］ 矢 矣 知 矧 矩 
血	The drop in the dish is blood。 It is similar to the drop we saw earlier on the dagger in the character for blade （frame 84）。 ［6］ 
盆	Part 。 。 。 dish。 ［9］ 
盟	Bright 。 。 。 dish。 ［13］ 
盗	Next 。 。 。 dish。 ［11］ 
温	Water 。 。 。 sun 。 。 。 dish。 ［12］ 
監	Slaves 。 。 。 reclining 。 。 。 ／one 。 。 。 dish。 ［15］ 
濫	Water 。 。 。 oversee。 ［18］ 
鑑	Metal 。 。 。 oversee。 ［23］ 
猛	Wild dogs 。 。 。 child 。 。 。 dish。 ［11］ 
盛	Here boom refers to something that is popular and prospering。 Its elements： turn into 。 。 。 dish。 ［11］ 
塩	Ground 。 。 。 reclining 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 dish。 ［13］ 
銀	Metal 。 。 。 silver。 ［14］ 砌 砒 
恨	State of mind 。 。 。 silver。 ［9］ 
根	Tree 。 。 。 silver。 ［10］ 
即	Silver 。 。 。 stamp。 ［7］ 
爵	Vulture 。 。 。 eye 。 。 。 silver 。 。 。 glue。 ［17］ 
節	Bamboo 。 。 。 instant。 ［13］ 
退	Road 。 。 。 silver。 ［9］ 
限	Pinnacle 。 。 。 silver。 ［9］ 
眼	Eye 。 。 。 silver。 ［11］ 
良	Drop of 。 。 。 silver。 ［7］  As a primitive、 use the image of a saint’s halo。 As with silver、 when this element is drawn on the left 、 the penultimate stroke is omitted、 giving us 臚。 
朗	Halo 。 。 。 moon。 ［10］ 
浪	Water 。 。 。 halo。 ［10］ 
娘	Woman 。 。 。 halo。 ［10］ 
食	If halo and umbrella aren´t enough、 break the halo down into drop and silver—or “silverware、” an additional primitive。 ［9］  As a primitive the kanji means eating or food。 As with silver、 on the left the final two strokes are combined into one。 
飯	Food 。 。 。 anti－。 ［12］ 
飲	Food 。 。 。 yawn。 ［12］ 
飢	Food 。 。 。 wind。 ［10］ 
餓	Food 。 。 。 ego。 ［15］ 
飾	Food 。 。 。 reclining 。 。 。 towel。 ［13］ 
館	 The abbreviation of Building suggests that this kanji is used in proper names、 as indeed it oft en is。 Keep your connotation distinct from Inst。 （frame 1304） when working with the elements： food 。 。 。 bureaucrat。 ［16］ 
養	Sheep 。 。 。 food。 The key word has the sense of promoting the development of something、 especially in a psychological or spiritual sense。 ［13］ 
飽	Eat 。 。 。 wrap。 ［13］ 
既	Silver 。 。 。 waitress。 Do not confuse this kanji’s key word with before （frame 248）。 ［10］ 
概	Roots 。 。 。 waitress。 Note that the kanji meaning of the two primitives to the right is not used here because we shall later meet a primitive meaning beforehand and want to preempt any confusion。 The same holds true in the following frame。 ［14］ 
慨	Resentment 。 。 。 waitress。 ［13］ 
平	This character is easiest remembered as a pictograph of a water lily floating on the surface of the water、 which gives it its meaning of even。 The fourth stroke represents the calm、 smooth surface of a pond、 and the final stroke the long stem of the plant reaching underwater。 ［5］ 砥 砦 砧 砲 破  As a primitive、 this kanji can keep its pictographic meaning of a water lily。 
呼	Mouth 。 。 。 water lily。 Note： this is the one time that the “stem” has a barb at the end。 Work this fact into your story。 ［8］ 
坪	This kanji belongs to an old Japanese system of measurement and indicates an area of about 36 square feet、 or the area taken up by two tatami mats。 Its elements： ground 。 。 。 water lily。 ［8］ 
評	Words 。 。 。 water lily。 ［12］ 
刈	Sheaf 。 。 。 saber。 ［4］ 
希	Sheaf 。 。 。 linen。 ［7］ 
凶	Sheaf 。 。 。 shovel。 ［4］ 硅 硎 
胸	Part of the body 。 。 。 bound up 。 。 。 villain。 ［10］ 
離	Top hat 。 。 。 villain 。 。 。 belt 。 。 。 elbow 。 。 。 turkey。 This is potentially one of the most difficult characters to remember。 Tackle it positively and let the image “sink in” by carrying it around with you today and calling it up in your spare moments。 ［18］ 
殺	Sheaf 。 。 。 tree 。 。 。 missile。 ［10］ 
純	Thread 。 。 。 earthworm。 ［10］ 
鈍	Metal 。 。 。 earthworm。 ［12］ 
辛	The character in this frame pictures food whose taste is so hot and spicy that it makes the hairs on your body stand up as straight as needles。 ［7］  As a primitive、 we shall use this meaning of spicy、 except when the two extra strokes are added to the bottom、 giving it the form of a tree： 臟。 Then we take its alternate meaning of a red pepper plant。 The connection is obvious。 
辞	Tongue 。 。 。 spicy。 ［13］ 
梓	Tree 。 。 。 spicy。 ［11］ 
宰	House 。 。 。 spicy。 ［10］ 
壁	Ketchup 。 。 。 ground。 ［16］ 
避	Ketchup 。 。 。 road。 ［16］ 
新	Red pepper 。 。 。 ax。 ［13］ 
薪	Flowers 。 。 。 new。 ［16］ 
親	Red pepper 。 。 。 see。 ［16］ 
幸	Simply by turning the dot at the top of the primitive for spicy into a cross shape、 we move from things bitter and spicy to things happy。 ［8］ 
執	Happiness 。 。 。 fat man。 ［11］ 
報	Happiness 。 。 。 stamp 。 。 。 crotch。 Compare frame 1399。 ［12］ 
叫	Mouth 。 。 。 cornucopia。 ［5］ 
糾	Thread 。 。 。 cornucopia。 ［8］ 
収	Cornucopia 。 。 。 crotch。 Keep distinct from both fare （frame  1004） and salary （frame 1349）。 ［4］ 
卑	A drop of 。 。 。 brains 。 。 。 cornucopia。 ［8］ 
碑	Rock 。 。 。 lowly。 ［13］ 
陸	The sense of land carried by this kanji is distinct from soil （frame 150） and ground （frame 515） in that it is meant to represent land seen from a distance、 that is、 land as opposed to “water。” Its elements： pinnacle 。 。 。 rice seedlings 。 。 。 ground。 ［11］ 
睦	Eye 。 。 。 rice seedlings 。 。 。 ground。 ［13］ 
勢	Rice seedlings 。 。 ground 。 。 。 fat man 。 。 。 muscle。 ［13］ 
熱	Rice seedlings 。 。 。 ground 。 。 。 fat man 。 。 。 oven fire。 ［15］ 
菱	Named aft er a diamond－shaped flower （the water caltrop）、 this key word refers to things shaped like a diamond。 Its elements： flower 。 。 。 rice seedlings 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［11］ 
陵	Pinnacle 。 。 。 rice seedlings 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［11］ 
亥	This kanji is the 12th sign of the Chinese zodiac： the sign of the hog。 It is best learned by thinking of an acorn－eating hog in connection with the primitive meaning given below。 ［6］ 硴 硺 硼 碁 碆 碇  The top hat represents the external shape of the acorn、and the unusual but easily written complex of strokes beneath it （which you might also see as distortions of an elbow and person） stands for the mysterious secret whereby the acorn contains the oak tree in a nutshell。 
核	Tree 。 。 。 acorn。 ［10］ 
刻	Acorn 。 。 。 saber。 ［8］ 
該	Words 。 。 。 acorn。 ［13］ 
劾	Acorn 。 。 。 muscle。 ［8］ 
述	Resin 。 。 。 road。 ［8］ 
術	Boulevard 。 。 。 resin。 ［11］ 
寒	House 。 。 。 celery 。 。 。 animal legs 。 。 。 ice。 ［12］ 
醸	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 grass skirt。 ［20］ 
譲	Words 。 。 。 grass skirt。 ［20］ 
壌	Ground 。 。 。 grass skirt。 The lot of this key word refers to a portion of land。 ［16］ 
嬢	Woman 。 。 。 grass skirt。 ［16］ 
毒	Grow up 。 。 。 breasts。 ［8］ 
素	Grow up 。 。 。 thread。 ［10］ 
麦	Grow up 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［7］ 
青	Grow up 。 。 。 moon。 ［8］ 
精	Rice 。 。 。 blue。 ［14］ 
請	Words 。 。 。 blue。 ［15］ 
情	State of mind 。 。 。 blue。 Do not confuse with emotion （frame  615）。 ［11］ 
晴	Take the key word in its associations with the weather （unless that tempts you to include the primitive for weather、 which doesn’t belong here）。 Its elements： sun 。 。 。 blue。 ［12］ 
清	Water 。 。 。 blue。 ［11］ 
静	Blue 。 。 。 contend。 Do not confuse with calm （frame 1147）。 ［14］ 
責	Grow up 。 。 。 oyster。 ［11］ 
績	Thread 。 。 。 blame。 ［17］ 
積	Wheat 。 。 。 blame。 This key word has to do with measurement、 and should be kept distinct from the kanji for quantity （frame  177）—even though the meanings are similar。 ［16］ 
債	Person 。 。 。 blame。 The key word refers to financial bonds。 ［13］ 
漬	Water 。 。 。 blame。 ［14］ 
表	Grow up 。 。 。 scarf。 This character represents the “outside” of a garment、 just as the kanji for back （frame 399） depicted the “inside” or lining。 ［8］ 
俵	Keep this kanji distinct from that for sack （frame 1006）。 Its elements are： person 。 。 。 surface。 ［10］ 
潔	Water 。 。 。 grow up 。 。 。 dagger 。 。 。 thread。 Do not confuse with upright （frame 55）。 ［15］ 
契	Grow up 。 。 。 dagger 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog。 The connotation of this character should be kept distinct from that for vow （frame  1133） and promise （frame 1362）。 ［9］ 
喫	Mouth 。 。 。 pledge。 ［12］ 
害	House 。 。 。 grow up 。 。 。 mouth。 ［10］ 
轄	Car 。 。 。 harm。 Hint： the image of an auto going “out of control” may help keep this key word distinct from others like it、 such as manipulate （frame 801）。 ［17］ 
割	Harm 。 。 。 saber。 ［12］ 
憲	The key word refers to the fundamental guiding principles of a government or other organization。 Its elements： House 。 。 。 grow up 。 。 。 eyes 。 。 。 heart。 ［16］ 
生	A single drop added to the element for grow up gives us the character for life。 ［5］  As a primitive、 we may think of a microscopic cell、 that miraculous unit that grows up to become a living being。 
星	Sun 。 。 。 cell。 ［9］ 
姓	Woman 。 。 。 cell。 ［8］ 
性	State of mind 。 。 。 cell。 ［8］ 
牲	Cow 。 。 。 cell。 ［9］ 
産	Vase 。 。 。 cliff 。 。 。 cell。 ［11］ 
隆	This character、 used for everything from little humps of hills to camel humps、 easily suggests the hunch on the pig’s back and hind parts where the best cuts of meat are to be found （and hence the English expression for luxury、 “living high off 
峰	Mountain 。 。 。 walking legs 。 。 。 bushes。 ［10］ 
縫	Thread 。 。 。 walking legs 。 。 。 bushes 。 。 。 road。 ［16］ 
拝	Fingers 。 。 。 bush 。 。 。 suspended from the ceiling。 ［8］ 
寿	Bushes 。 。 。 glue。 ［7］ 
鋳	Metal 。 。 。 longevity。 As you probably guessed from the elements、 the key word refers to the casting of metals。 ［15］ 
籍	Bamboo 。 。 。 Christmas tree 。 。 。 once upon a time。 ［20］ 
春	Bonsai 。 。 。 sun。 ［9］ 
椿	Tree 。 。 。 springtime。 ［13］ 
泰	Bonsai 。 。 。 rice grains。 ［10］ 
奏	Bonsai 。 。 。 heavens。 ［9］ 
実	House 。 。 。 bonsai。 ［8］ 
奉	Bonsai 。 。 。 cornstalk。 Use a ritualistic、 religious meaning。 ［8］ 
俸	Person 。 。 。 dedicate。 ［10］ 
棒	Tree 。 。 。 dedicate。 ［12］ 
謹	Words 。 。 。 cabbage。 ［17］ 
勤	Cabbage 。 。 。 muscle。 ［12］ 
漢	Water 。 。 。 scarecrow。 The key word has come to refer to things Chinese in general、 including the kanji themselves （for which this character is used）。 ［13］ 
嘆	Mouth 。 。 。 scarecrow。 ［13］ 
難	Scarecrow 。 。 。 turkey。 ［18］ 
華	Flower 。 。 。 silage 。 。 。 needle。 ［10］ 
垂	A drop of 。 。 。 silage 。 。 。 walking stick 。 。 。 。 The character is written in the order of its elements。 ［8］ 
睡	Eyes 。 。 。 droop。 ［13］ 
錘	Metal 。 。 。 droop。 ［16］ 
乗	The simplest way to remember this character is to find the sprig of wheat in it、 hidden because it doubles up with one stroke of silage。 ［9］ 
剰	Ride 。 。 。 saber。 ［11］ 
今	The final stroke of this kanji is a rare shape、 which we have not met before and will only meet in this character and others that include it as a primitive。 We are more accustomed to seeing it straightened out as part of other shapes—for instance、 as the second stroke of mouth。 If you need any help at all with this character、 you may picture it as two hands of a clock pointing to what time it is now。 The element above it、 meeting、 should easily relate to that image。 ［4］  We shall use clock as the primitive meaning of this character、in line with the above explanation。 
含	Clock 。 。 。 mouth。 ［7］ 
吟	As we have already learned characters for poem （frame 346）、 chant （frame 21）、 and song （frame 469）、 it is important to pro－ tect this key word with an image all its own。 Its elements are the same as those above； only the position has changed： mouth 。 。 。 clock。 ［7］ 
念	Clock 。 。 。 heart。 ［8］ 
琴	A pair of jewels 。 。 。 clock。 ［12］ 
陰	Just as the sunshine （frame 1300） represents the masculine principle in nature （Yang）、 the shade stands for the feminine principle （Yin）。 Its elements are： pinnacle 。 。 。 clock 。 。 。 rising cloud。 ［11］ 
予	Think of this character as identical to the halberd （frame 1225） except that the final stroke has been omitted。 Return to that character and devise some image to take this diff erence into account。 ［4］ 
序	Cave 。 。 。 beforehand。 ［7］ 
預	Beforehand 。 。 。 head。 ［13］ 
野	This character refers to rustic life and rustic fields primarily、 and from there gets derived meanings。 Its elements： computer 。 。 。 beforehand。 ［11］ 
兼	At the top we have the animal horns and the single horizontal stroke to give them something to hang onto。 Below that、 we see one rake with two handles。 Finally、 we see a pair of strokes splitting away from each of the handles、 indicating that they are both splitting under the pressure。 The composite picture is of someone holding down two jobs concurrently、 using the same kit of tools to move in two diff erent directions and ending up in a mess。 Take the time to find this sense in the kanji and it will be easy to remember、 despite initial appearances。 ［10］ 磋 磐 磑 磔 磚 磧 磨 磬 磯 磴 
嫌	Woman 。 。 。 concurrently。 ［13］ 
鎌	Metal 。 。 。 concurrently。 ［18］ 
謙	Words 。 。 。 concurrently。 ［17］ 
廉	Cave 。 。 。 concurrently。 ［13］ 
西	To our way of counting directions、 the west always comes fourth。 So it is convenient to find the character for four in this kanji。 But since we want only one of the four directions、 the west adds the one at the top and sucks the human legs a bit out of their mouth in the process。 ［6］ 磽 礁 礇 礎  As a primitive、 the meaning of west can be expanded to refer to the Old West of cowboy－movie fame、 just as the meaning of the character for east was expanded into the East。 Note、 however、 that in its primitive form the legs are straightened out and reach down to the bottom of the mouth。 Hence、 we get the shape 臠。 With the exception of one kanji、 given in the following frame、 this element always appears at the top of its relative primitives。 
価	Person 。 。 。 Old West。 ［8］ 
要	Old West 。 。 。 woman。 ［9］ 
腰	Part of the body 。 。 。 need。 ［13］ 
票	Old West 。 。 。 altar。 ［11］ 
漂	Water 。 。 。 ballot。 ［14］ 
標	Tree 。 。 。 ballot。 ［15］ 
栗	Old West 。 。 。 tree。 ［10］ 
遷	West 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 snake 。 。 。 road。 ［15］ 
覆	West 。 。 。 restore。 ［18］ 
煙	Hearth 。 。 。 Old West 。 。 。 ground。 ［13］ 
南	Belt 。 。 。 happiness。 Note how the belt runs through the middle of happiness。 ［9］ 礑 礒 礙 
楠	Tree 。 。 。 south。 ［13］ 
献	South 。 。 。 chihuahua。 ［13］ 
門	The pictograph of two swinging gates is so clear in this kanji that only its stroke order needs to be memorized。 In case you should have any trouble、 though、 you might doodle with the shapes on a piece of paper、 taking care to note the diff erence in the stroke order of the two facing doors。 The gates usually serve as an enclosure、 and are written before whatever it is they enclose。 ［8］ 示 礼 社 祀 祁 祇 祈 祉  As a primitive、 we shall continue to give it the meaning of gates、 but recommend the image of swinging doors （like the kind once common at entrances to saloons） to distinguish it from the primitive for door。 
問	Gates 。 。 。 mouth。 ［11］ 
閲	Gates 。 。 。 devil。 Keep the connotation of this key word distinct from those of inspection （frame 1093）、 revise （frame 339）、 and perusal （frame 855）。 ［15］ 
閥	Gates 。 。 。 fell。 ［14］ 
間	Gates 。 。 。 sun／day。 This interval applies to time and space alike、 but the latter is better for creating an image。 ［12］ 
簡	Bamboo 。 。 。 interval。 ［18］ 
開	Gates 。 。 。 two hands。 ［12］ 
閉	Gates 。 。 。 genie。 ［11］ 
閣	Gates 。 。 。 each。 ［14］ 
閑	Gates 。 。 。 tree。 ［12］ 
聞	Gates 。 。 。 ear。 Compare the story you invented for the kanji meaning listen （frame 827）。 ［14］ 
潤	Water 。 。 。 gates 。 。 。 king。 ［15］ 
欄	Tree 。 。 。 gates 。 。 。 east。 ［20］ 
闘	Gates 。 。 。 table 。 。 。 glue。 Do not confuse with contend （frame 1154）。 ［18］ 
倉	The single gate is used here not in order to represent one gate、 but many of them、 indeed a meeting of gates。 Add mouth （as an entrance here） and you end up with godown。 That should help keep this character distinct from warehouse （frame 589）。 ［10］ 
創	Godown 。 。 。 saber。 ［12］ 
非	This key word、 a negating prefix、 is a doodle of a heavy iron pole with bars extending in both directions、 to create the picture of a jail cell。 From there to “un－” is but a short step。 ［8］ 祐 祓 祕 祖 祗 祚 祝 神  As a primitive、 we shall draw on the explanation above for the meaning of jail cell。 
俳	This character is used for the haiku、 the 17－syllable poem that is one of Japan’s best－known literary forms。 Its elements： person 。 。 。 jail cell。 ［10］ 
排	Fingers 。 。 。 jail cell。 ［11］ 
悲	Jail cell 。 。 。 heart。 ［12］ 
罪	Eye 。 。 。 jail cell。 ［13］ 
輩	Jail cell 。 。 。 car。 ［15］ 
扉	Door 。 。 。 jail cell。 ［12］ 
侯	Person 。 。 。 key 。 。 。 dart。 Hint： the pun suggested by the pronunciation of the key word and the primitive for key may come in helpful。 ［9］ 
候	Marquis 。 。 。 walking stick。 Note where the walking stick is positioned in this kanji。 ［10］ 
決	The etymology of decide （de－cidere ＝ cut off ） will help here； the elements are： water 。 。 。 guillotine。 ［7］ 
快	State of mind 。 。 。 guillotine。 ［7］ 
偉	Person 。 。 。 locket。 ［12］ 
違	Locket 。 。 。 road。 ［13］ 
緯	Thread 。 。 。 locket。 ［16］ 
衛	Boulevard 。 。 。 locket。 Do not confuse with ward off （frame 1302）、 protect （frame 997）、 guard （frame 186）、 or safeguard （frame 700）。 ［16］ 
韓	As with Italy （frame 1161） and Africa （frame 1295）、 this character simply abbreviates the full name of Korea。 Its elements： mist 。 。 。 locket。 ［18］ 
干	It is best to see this kanji as a pictograph of a revolving circular clothesline （viewed from the side）。 Spin it around quickly in your mind’s eye to give it the connotation of to dry。 ［3］ 舞 舟 舩  The primitive meaning is clothesline。
肝	Part of the body 。 。 。 dry。 ［7］ 
刊	Dry 。 。 。 saber。 ［5］ 
汗	Water 。 。 。 dry。 ［6］ 
軒	This kanji、 a counter for houses、 is made up of cars 。 。 。 dry。 ［10］ 
岸	Mountain 。 。 。 cliff 。 。 。 dry。 ［8］ 
幹	Mist 。 。 。 umbrella 。 。 。 dry。 The meaning of this key word extends beyond tree trunks to represent the main stem or line of anything from railway lines to managerial staff s。 This should help distinguish it from the stories used earlier for book （frame 211） and body （frame 957）、 both of which made use of the image of a tree trunk、 as well as the kanji for trunk （frame 182）。 ［13］ 
芋	Flowers 。 。 。 potato。 ［6］ 
宇	House 。 。 。 potato。 ［6］ 
余	Umbrella 。 。 。 potato 。 。 。 little。 The last stroke of potato and the first of little coincide in this character。 ［7］ 
除	Pinnacle 。 。 。 scale。 ［10］ 
徐	Line 。 。 。 scale。 ［10］ 
叙	Scale 。 。 crotch。 The key word has to do with conferring ranks、 titles、 and awards。 It should not be confused with bestow （frame 1246） or impart （frame 736）。 ［9］ 
途	Scale 。 。 。 road。 ［10］ 
斜	Scale 。 。 。 measuring cup。 ［11］ 
塗	Water 。 。 。 scale 。 。 。 ground。 ［13］ 
束	In the same way that we were able to see the sun in the tree within the kanji for east、 here we see a square container in the shape of a mouth。 ［7］ 
頼	Bundle 。 。 。 head。 ［16］ 
瀬	Water 。 。 。 bundle 。 。 。 head。 ［19］ 
勅	In order to keep this character distinct from that for an imperial edict （frame 342）、 we must draw again on a pun。 Think of the order here as a mail order or an order of pizza phoned in by the Emperor for delivery to the imperial palace。 Then it will not be hard to put together bundle and muscle to form a story about an imperial order。 ［9］ 
疎	Zoo 。 。 。 bundle。 Note that the element for zoo is flattened out on the left just as leg （frame 1279） had been。 This is the only time we will meet this form in this book。 ［12］ 
速	Bundle 。 。 。 road。 ［10］ 
整	Bundle 。 。 。 taskmaster 。 。 。 correct。 ［16］ 
剣	Awl 。 。 。 saber。 As we promised way back in frame 83、 here at last is the kanji on which the primitive element of the same name is based。 ［10］ 
険	Pinnacle 。 。 。 awl。 ［11］ 
検	Tree 。 。 。 awl。 ［12］ 
倹	Person 。 。 。 awl。 ［10］ 
重	Thousand 。 。 。 ri。 Note how the long vertical stroke doubles up to serve both elements。 ［9］ 祥 票 祭 祷 祺 祿 禀 禁 禄 
動	Heavy 。 。 。 muscle。 ［11］ 
勲	Move 。 。 。 oven fire。 So as not to confuse this kanji with the general character for merit （frame 1276）、 you may associate the key word with military decorations and medals of distinction、 both of which it is used for。 ［15］ 
働	Person 。 。 。 move。 Do not confuse with labor （frame 860）。 ［13］ 
種	Wheat 。 。 。 heavy。 ［14］ 
衝	Boulevard 。 。 。 heavy。 ［15］ 
薫	Flowers 。 。 。 heavy 。 。 。 oven fire。 Do not confuse with incense （frame 911） or perfumed （frame 493）。 ［16］ 
病	Sickness 。 。 。 third class。 ［10］ 
痴	Know 。 。 。 sickness。 ［13］ 
痘	Sickness 。 。 。 beans。 ［12］ 
症	Sickness 。 。 。 correct。 ［10］ 
疾	Be sure to keep this character distinct from quick （frame 1669） and swift （frame 280）。 Picture a succession of poison darts （the sort that inflict sickness） flying out rapid－fire from a blowgun、 so that “rapid－fire” can conjure up the proper image。 ［10］ 
痢	Sickness 。 。 。 profit。 ［12］ 
疲	Sickness 。 。 。 pelt。 ［10］ 
疫	Sickness 。 。 。 missile。 ［9］ 
痛	Sickness 。 。 。 chop－seal 。 。 。 utilize。 ［12］ 
癖	Sickness 。 。 。 ketchup。 ［18］ 
匿	Box 。 。 。 young。 ［10］ 禎 禔 禛 
匠	Box 。 。 。 ax。 ［6］ 
医	Box 。 。 。 dart。 ［7］ 
匹	Box 。 。 。 human legs。 ［4］ 
区	The ward referred to here is a subdivision of a large city。 Its elements： box 。 。 。 sheaves。 When used as a primitive element、 it may be helpful at times to break it up into these same composite elements。 ［4］ 
枢	Tree 。 。 。 ward。 ［8］ 
殴	Ward 。 。 。 missile。 ［8］ 
欧	Ward 。 。 。 yawn。 Like the kanji of frame 1647、 this character is an abbreviation of the name of a geographical region。 ［8］ 
抑	Fingers 。 。 。 box 。 。 。 stamps。 ［7］ 
仰	This character is used both for lying on one’s back faceup、 and for looking up to someone with respect and awe。 Its elements： person 。 。 。 box 。 。 。 stamps。 ［6］ 
迎	Box 。 。 。 stamps 。 。 。 road。 ［7］ 
登	Teepee 。 。 。 table。 Do not confuse with rise up （frame 43）。 ［12］ 
澄	Water 。 。 。 ascend。 ［15］ 
発	This key word refers to the discharging of guns、 trains、 people、 and even words。 The elements： teepee 。 。 。 two 。 。 。 human legs。 Contrast the writing with frame 59。 ［9］ 
廃	Cave 。 。 。 discharge。 ［12］ 
僚	Person 。 。 。 pup tent。 Choose some connotation of the key word that will keep it distinct for you from companion （frame 19）、 friend （frame 704）、 consort （frame 1203）、 and comrade （frame 1637）。 ［14］ 
寮	House 。 。 。 pup tent。 ［15］ 
療	Sickness 。 。 。 pup tent。 ［17］ 
彫	The two primitives here、 circumference and shape、 belong naturally to the special connotations that diff erentiate carving from engraving （see frame 1521）。 ［11］ 
形	Two hands 。 。 。 shape。 ［7］ 
影	Scenery 。 。 。 shape。 ［15］ 
杉	Tree 。 。 。 shape。 ［7］ 
彩	Vulture 。 。 。 tree 。 。 。 shape。 ［11］ 
彰	Badge 。 。 。 shape。 The key word is synonymous with “clear” or “openly expressed。” ［14］ 
彦	Vase 。 。 。 cliff 。 。 。 shape。 ［9］ 禽 禾 禿 
顔	Lad 。 。 。 head。 ［18］ 
須	Shape 。 。 。 head。 This is the only time that shape is placed to the left of its relative element、 the head。 ［12］ 
膨	Part of the body 。 。 。 drum 。 。 。 shape。 Compare expand （frame 1118）。 ［16］ 
参	Elbow 。 。 。 St。 Bernard dog 。 。 。 shape。 ［8］ 
惨	A state of mind 。 。 。 visit。 ［11］ 
修	Person 。 。 。 walking stick 。 。 。 taskmaster 。 。 。 shape。 ［10］ 
珍	Jewel 。 。 。 umbrella 。 。 。 shape。 ［9］ 
診	Words 。 。 。 umbrella 。 。 。 shape。 The key word refers to a medical examination。 ［12］ 
文	Under the familiar top hat we see a crisscross pattern or design、 like that found on woodwork or garments。 This should make an ugly enough image to help remember it。 It can be associated with sentence by thinking of a sentence as a grammatical pattern。 ［4］ 紳 紵 紹 紺  The primitive meaning for this character will be plaid、the familiar crisscross pattern frequently used in textiles。 
	－à－vis 対 Plaid 。 。 。 glue。 ［7］ 
紋	Thread 。 。 。 plaid。 ［10］ 
蚊	Insect 。 。 。 plaid。 ［10］ 
斉	Plaid 。 。 。 fenceposts 。 。 。 two。 Do not confuse with just so （frame 388）。 ［8］ 
剤	Adjust 。 。 。 saber。 Think of this as a dose of medicine。 ［10］ 
済	Water 。 。 。 adjust。 Do not confuse with complete （frame 97）、 end （frame 1352）、 or perfect （frame 187）。 ［11］ 
斎	Plaid 。 。 。 fenceposts 。 。 。 altar。 This is a “religious” purification、 which distinguishes it from the simple kanji for pure （frame  1539）。 ［11］ 
粛	Sieve 。 。 。 fenceposts。 Take special care in writing this character、 even though it follows the general rules we learned back in frame 4。 ［11］ 秀 私 秉 秋 
塁	The kanji of this frame refers to the four bases that are placed at the corners of a baseball infield。 The elements： field 。 。 。 sparkler 。 。 。 ground。 ［12］ 
楽	Dove 。 。 。 sparkler 。 。 。 tree。 ［13］ 
薬	Flowers 。 。 。 music。 ［16］ 
率	Mysterious 。 。 。 sparkler 。 。 。 ten。 Do not confuse with proportion （frame 1553）。 ［11］ 
渋	Water 。 。 。 footprint 。 。 。 sparkler。 ［11］ 
摂	Fingers 。 。 。 ear 。 。 。 sparkler。 Do not confuse with substitute （frame 1005）。 ［13］ 
央	The elements depict a St。 Bernard with its head and paws keeping their stick－like form、 but with the middle or center of its body filled out in a box－like shape。 ［5］ 
英	Flowers 。 。 。 center。 This is another abbreviation used to identify a country by the pronunciation of the kanji。 ［8］ 
映	Sun 。 。 。 center。 ［9］ 
赤	Ground 。 。 。 dagger 。 。 。 little。 The two strokes of the dagger take the place of the middle stroke of little。 ［7］ 租 秡 秣 秤  As a primitive on the left、 this kanji keeps the same form。 Elsewhere、 the first two strokes are abbreviated to a single dot、 giving us 亦。 This latter form will take the meaning of an apple。 
赦	Red 。 。 。 taskmaster。 ［11］ 
変	Apple 。 。 。 walking legs。 ［9］ 
跡	Wooden leg 。 。 。 apple。 ［13］ 
蛮	Apple 。 。 。 insects。 ［12］ 
恋	Apple 。 。 。 heart。 ［10］ 
湾	Water 。 。 。 apple 。 。 。 bow。 ［12］ 
黄	Salad 。 。 。 sprout 。 。 。 animal legs。 ［11］ 
横	Tree 。 。 。 yellow。 ［15］ 
把	Fingers 。 。 。 mosaic。 ［7］ 
色	Bound up 。 。 。 mosaic。 ［6］ 
絶	Thread 。 。 。 color。 ［12］ 
艶	Bountiful 。 。 。 color。 ［19］ 
肥	Flesh 。 。 。 mosaic。 ［8］ 
甘	This kanji is a pictograph of a small wicker basket。 （The extra short stroke in the middle helps keep it distinct from the character for twenty。） All one needs to add is some image of sweet cakes or breads carried in the basket、 and the union of picture and meaning is complete。 Take care not to confuse with confectionary （frame 1122）。 ［5］ 称 移 稀 稈 程  As a primitive、 the pictograph’s meaning of a wicker basket is used、 a small one like the kind used for picnics。 
紺	Thread 。 。 。 wicker basket。 ［11］ 
某	 The key word here refers to the adjective for an unspecified person or thing。 Its elements： wicker basket 。 。 。 tree。 ［9］ 
謀	Words 。 。 。 so－and－so。 ［16］ 
媒	Woman 。 。 。 so－and－so。 ［12］ 
欺	Bushel basket 。 。 。 yawn。 ［12］ 
棋	Tree 。 。 。 bushel basket。 ［12］ 
旗	Banner 。 。 。 bushel basket。 ［14］ 
期	Bushel basket 。 。 。 month。 As the month indicates、 this has to do with periods of time。 ［12］ 
碁	Bushel basket 。 。 。 stones。 The key word refers to the Japanese game played with black and white colored stones on a lined board。 ［13］ 
基	Bushel basket 。 。 。 soil。 ［11］ 
甚	Bushel basket 。 。 。 equal。 Note how the first stroke of equal doubles up with the sixth stroke of the bushel basket、 and how the animal legs of the bushel basket are dropped to make room for the human legs of equal。 ［9］ 
勘	Tremendously 。 。 。 muscle。 ［11］ 
堪	Soil 。 。 。 tremendously。 ［12］ 
貴	Purse 。 。 。 shells。 ［12］ 
遺	Precious 。 。 。 road。 ［15］ 
遣	This kanji takes away the maestro’s baton and replaces it with a purse。 The road represents his being dispatched on his way as an obvious misfit。 You will remember that when he did have his baton、 he was being chased down the road by his fans。 All of which shows what a diff erence a single stroke can make！ ［13］ 
舞	The top two strokes show someone reclining、 and the next six are a pictograph of an oaken tub ribbed with metal strips、 like the kind once used for bathing。 At the bottom、 the sunglasses round off the character。 ［15］ 稗 稘 稙 稚 稜 
無	This character is the Japanese character for the supreme philosophical principle of much Oriental thought： nothingness。 Make use of the oaken tub from the previous frame、 and add to that the oven fire at the bottom。 ［12］ 
組	Thread 。 。 。 shelf。 ［11］ 
粗	Rice 。 。 。 shelf。 ［11］ 
租	Wheat 。 。 。 shelf。 ［10］ 
祖	Altar 。 。 。 shelf。 ［9］ 
阻	Pinnacle 。 。 。 shelf。 ［8］ 
査	Tree 。 。 。 shelf。 ［9］ 
助	Shelf 。 。 。 power。 The reason why the shelf appears on the left here is that the right side is the normal position for power、 the stronger primitive。 Indeed、 the only exception in all the kanji is the character for add （frame 867）。 ［7］ 
宜	This kanji is a polite way of expressing one’s best regards to another。 Its elements： house 。 。 。 shelf。 ［8］ 
畳	Rice field 。 。 。 crown 。 。 。 shelf。 ［12］ 
並	This character represents a slightly stylized duplication of the kanji for stand up。 By lengthening the sixth and seventh strokes、 you will see how this is done。 ［8］ 稟 稠 種 稱 稲 稷 稻 稼  The primitive meaning remains the same as that of the kanji、but special attention has to be given to the varieties of shape this element can undergo。 It is the most difficult one you will meet in this book。 When it appears beneath its relative primitive、 the top three strokes are omitted、 though the third horizontal stroke may be doubled up with the bottom horizontal stroke of the element above it： 脯。 atop its relative primitive、 it can keep its kanji shape。 When it does not、 the top three strokes are removed and all of them are replaced below the primitive’s bottom line： 脱。 We shall acknowledge this latter transformation by changing its meaning to upside down in a row。 
普	Row 。 。 。 sun。 ［12］ 
譜	Words 。 。 。 universal。 ［19］ 
湿	Water 。 。 。 sun 。 。 。 row。 ［12］ 
顕	Sun 。 。 。 row 。 。 。 heads。 ［18］ 
繊	Thread 。 。 。 Thanksgiving 。 。 。 row。 ［17］ 
霊	Rain 。 。 。 two 。 。 。 row。 This character will refer only to the inhabitants of the “spirit world、” and not to moods or temperaments、 for which we will learn another character in frame 1885。 ［15］ 
業	In a row upside down 。 。 。 not yet。 ［13］ 答 策 筝 
撲	Fingers 。 。 。 upside down in a row 。 。 。 husbands。 ［15］ 
僕	This key word is yet another synonym for “I、” somewhat more familiar in tone。 As a rule、 it is a word that boys and men use to refer to themselves。 Its elements： person 。 。 。 husbands 。 。 。 in a row upside down。 ［14］ 
共	Salad 。 。 。 animal legs。 ［6］  The primitive retains the meaning of together。Imagine things strung together like fish on a line、 beads on a thread、 or whatever。 The main thing is to avoid putting them in a straight row、 which would confound this element with the previous one。 As we saw with bushel basket、 this primitive can join its legs to the final horizontal stroke and stretch them to form an enclosure。 
供	Submit here is a transitive verb、 meaning to off er or present。 Its elements： person 。 。 。 strung together。 ［8］ 
異	Brains 。 。 。 together。 ［11］ 
翼	Feathers 。 。 。 uncommon。 ［17］ 
洪	Water 。 。 。 strung together。 ［9］ 
港	Deluge 。 。 。 snakes。 ［12］ 
暴	Sun 。 。 。 strung together 。 。 。 rice grains。 ［15］ 
爆	Fire 。 。 。 outburst。 ［19］ 
恭	Strung together 。 。 。 valentine。 ［10］ 
選	Two snakes 。 。 。 strung together 。 。 。 road。 ［15］ 
殿	 Flags 。 。 。 strung together 。 。 。 missile。 ［13］ 
井	Recalling that there are no circular strokes、 and that the shape of the square and the square within a square （frame 586） have already been used、 it should be relatively easy to see how this character can be consider a pictograph of a well。 ［4］ 繞 繦 繧 繩 
囲	Well 。 。 。 pent in。 ［7］ 
耕	Christmas tree 。 。 。 well。 ［10］ 
亜	In this kanji、 the abbreviation for Asia、 you should be able to see the character for mouth behind the Roman numeral ii。 ［7］ 繪 繭 繰 繹 
悪	Asia 。 。 。 heart。 ［11］ 
円	This kanji、 also used for Yen、 is one you are not likely to need to study formally、 since you can hardly get around in Japan without it。 The connection is that the yennies、 like pennies、 are circular in shape。 In any case、 the elements are： glass canopy 。 。 。 walking stick 。 。 。 one。 ［4］ 稽 稾 稿 穀 
角	Bound up 。 。 。 glass canopy 。 。 。 walking stick 。 。 。 two。 If you write the character once、 you will see why we avoided using the element for soil、 which would prompt you to write it in improper order。 ［7］ 穂 穃 穆 穉  As a primitive、 imagine the tool used by draft smen and carpenters to draw right－angles。 
触	Angle 。 。 。 insect。 ［13］ 
解	Angle 。 。 。 dagger 。 。 。 cow。 ［13］ 
再	Jewel 。 。 。 with a belt hung on it。 Note how the belt is drawn right aft er the first stroke of jewel。 ［6］ 積 穎 穏 穐 穗 
講	Words 。 。 。 funnel。 ［17］ 
購	Shells 。 。 。 funnel。 The key word is meant to suggest magazine subscriptions and the like。 ［17］ 
構	Tree 。 。 。 funnel。 ［14］ 
溝	Water 。 。 。 funnel。 ［13］ 
論	Words 。 。 。 meeting 。 。 。 scrapbook。 The argument here is a process of academic reasoning、 not a personal quarrel or spat。 ［15］ 
倫	Person 。 。 。 meeting 。 。 。 scrapbook。 ［10］ 
輪	Car 。 。 。 meeting 。 。 。 scrapbook。 ［15］ 
偏	Person 。 。 。 door 。 。 。 scrapbook。 The sense of the key word is that of having a bias or preference for someone or something。 ［11］ 
遍	Door 。 。 。 scrapbook 。 。 。 a road。 ［12］ 
編	Thread 。 。 。 door 。 。 。 scrapbook。 ［15］ 
冊	This key word is a counter for books。 It diff ers from scrapbook both in the writing order and in the extension of the second horizontal stroke。 ［5］ 穽 穿 突 
典	We introduce this character here because of its connection to the book－related kanji treated above。 It is based on the character for bend （frame 1172）、 whose last stroke is lengthened to coincide with the first stroke of the element for tool。 ［8］ 
氏	Pay close attention to the stroke order of the elements when learning to write this character。 The elements： a long drop 。 。 。 fishhook 。 。 。 a one 。 。 。 fishhook。 ［4］ 窃 窄 窈 窒 
紙	Thread 。 。 。 family name。 ［10］ 
婚	Woman 。 。 。 family name 。 。 。 day。 ［11］ 
低	Person 。 。 。 calling card。 ［7］ 
抵	Fingers 。 。 。 calling card。 ［8］ 
底	Cave 。 。 。 calling card。 ［8］ 
民	In place of the drop at the start of the character for family name、 we have a mouth、 which makes you think of the “vox populi。” ［5］ 窓 窕 窖 窗 窘 
眠	Eyes 。 。 。 people。 ［10］ 
捕	Fingers 。 。 。 dog tag。 ［10］ 
浦	Water 。 。 。 dog tag。 ［10］ 
蒲	Flowers 。 。 。 bay。 ［13］ 
舗	Cottage 。 。 。 dog tag。 The key word refers to the noun、 not the verb。 ［15］ 
補	Cloak 。 。 。 dog tag。 ［12］ 
邸	Calling card 。 。 。 city walls。 ［8］ 
郭	Receive 。 。 。 city walls。 ［11］ 
郡	Old boy 。 。 。 city walls。 ［10］ 
郊	Mingle 。 。 。 city walls。 ［9］ 
部	Muzzle 。 。 。 city walls。 ［11］ 
都	Someone 。 。 。 city walls。 ［11］ 
郵	Droop 。 。 。 city walls。 ［11］ 
邦	Bushes 。 。 。 city walls。 ［7］ 
郷	Cocoon 。 。 。 silver 。 。 。 city walls。 ［11］ 
響	Hometown 。 。 。 sound。 ［20］ 
郎	Halo 。 。 。 city walls。 ［9］ 
廊	Cave 。 。 。 son。 ［12］ 
盾	Dragging 。 。 。 ten eyes。 ［9］ 
循	Line 。 。 。 shield。 ［12］ 
派	Water 。 。 。 drag 。 。 。 rag。 Back in frame 1048 we indicated that this latter primitive would come up once again、 as it does in this and the following two frames。 ［9］ 
脈	Part of body 。 。 。 drag 。 。 。 rag。 ［10］ 
衆	Blood 。 。 。 drag 。 。 。 rag。 ［12］ 
逓	Drag 。 。 。 cornstalk 。 。 。 belt 。 。 。 road。 ［10］ 
段	The kanji connoting rank or class shows us a new element on the left ： the familiar primitive for staples with an additional stroke cutting through the vertical stroke。 It is easiest in these cases to make a primitive related to what we already know。 Hence、 we call it a staple gun。 To the right、 missile。 ［9］ 窺 窿 竃 竄 竅 竇 竈 竊 立 
鍛	Metal 。 。 。 grade。 ［17］ 
后	Drag 。 。 。 one 。 。 。 mouth。 ［6］ 
幻	Cocoon 。 。 。 clothes hanger。 ［4］ 
司	Clothes hanger 。 。 。 one 。 。 。 mouth。 ［5］ 
伺	This honorific form of call on （frame 495） is made up of： person 。 。 。 director。 ［7］ 
詞	The key word、 parts of speech、 refers to nouns、 verbs、 adjective、 adverbs、 and so on。 The elements： words 。 。 。 directors。 ［12］ 
飼	Eat 。 。 。 director。 The sense is of rearing of animals。 ［13］ 
嗣	Mouth 。 。 。 scrapbook 。 。 。 director。 ［13］ 
舟	After the drop and the glass canopy、 we come to a combination of three strokes that we met only once before、 in the character for mama （frame 101）。 The pictographic meaning we gave it there has no etymological relationship to this character、 but use it if it helps。 ［6］ 竍 竏 竑 竒 竓 竕 
舶	The type of boat connoted by this key word is a large oceangoing liner。 The important thing here is to work with the elements boat and dove to make an image distinct from that of the former frame。 Don’t count on size alone to distinguish the boat from the liner。 ［11］ 
航	Boat 。 。 。 whirlwind。 ［10］ 
般	Boat 。 。 。 missile。 ［10］ 
盤	Carrier 。 。 。 dish。 ［15］ 
搬	Fingers 。 。 。 carrier。 ［13］ 
船	Boat 。 。 。 gully。 ［11］ 
艦	Boat 。 。 。 oversee。 ［21］ 
艇	Boat 。 。 。 courts。 ［13］ 
瓜	The only thing that distinguishes this from the claw is the elbow、 made by doubling up the third stroke and adding a fourth。 ［5］ 站 竚 竝 竟 章 
弧	Bow 。 。 。 melon。 ［8］ 
孤	Child 。 。 。 melon。 ［8］ 
繭	Though it’s a good thing that the primitive for cocoon has been radically abbreviated from this、 its full form as a kanji、 the story it holds is a charming one。 The silkworm （insect） eats the leaves of the mulberry bush （the flowers）、 digests them and transforms them into thread with which it spins about itself、 in mystic wisdom、 its own coffin （the hood）。 The dividing line that separates the two elements helps the picture of the little worm cutting itself off from contact with the outside world、 but as a character stroke、 it is a clear exception。 ［18］ 竡 竢 竣 童 竦 
益	Poised over the dish is a pair of animal horns that are attached to a pair of animal legs by a single horizontal stroke。 ［10］  竧 竪 竫 
暇	The element for day on the left is logical enough。 Next to it we see staples being held in a mouth （one stroke is doubled up）、 indicating working on one’s hobby or handicraft s at home in one’s spare time。 The small box at the top right is facing backwards、 or more properly “inside out。” Finally、 we have the crotch at the bottom。 ［13］ 竭 端 竰 競 竸 
敷	At the top we have the arrowhead whose vertical line joins it to the rice field （or brains） below it。 Beneath it、 the compass； and to the right、 the taskmaster。 ［15］ 竹 竺 竿 
来	This odd but common kanji is built up of the character for not yet into which a pair of animal horns has been inserted。 ［7］ 笂 笄 笆 笈 笊 笋 笏 
気	The spirit in this character refers to the changeable moods and airs of one’s personality as well as to the more essential combination of vital forces that distinguish things and individuals one from the other。 Its elements are： reclining 。 。 。  。 。 。 fishhook 。 。 。 sheaf。 Do not confuse with spirits （frame 1791）。 ［6］ 
汽	Think of this character as a sibling of that for spirit。 Simply replace sheaves with drops of water on the left in order to get vapor。 ［7］ 
飛	The two large hooks have little propellers （the two drops on each hook） attached to them for flying。 Beneath is the measuring box、 which serves as the body of this flying contraption。 The stroke order will cause some problems、 so take care with it。 ［9］ 笑 笘 笙 笛 笞 笠 笥 符 笨 
沈	The technique for sinking used in this kanji is unique。 Rather than the biblical image of tying a millstone about the victim’s neck、 here we see a crown tied about one leg before the unfortunate party is tossed into the water。 ［7］ 
妻	Ten 。 。 。 rakes 。 。 。 woman。 ［8］ 第 笳 笵 笶 笹 筅 
衰	Let this key word connote the decline and fall of the Roman Empire。 It shows a fellow in a top hat and scarf、 trying hard to look happy by putting a walking stick in his mouth sideways to twist his face into a grotesque but semipermanent smile。 ［10］ 筆 筈 等 筋 筌 筍 筒 
衷	Between the top hat and the scarf you will see the character for in which is truncated at the bottom so as not to interfere with the scarf。 You can think of this character as forming a pair with the one just learned in the last frame： there the in （the walking stick in the mouth） was set on its side； in this character it is set upright。 ［10］ 椥 椦 椨 椪 椰 椴 椶 
面	Imagine a mask over your head with eyes peeping not only out of the normal place、 but from all over the head、 a hundred in all （the element for eye displacing the fifth stroke of that for hundred）。 ［9］ 筥 筧 筬 筮 筰 筱 筴 筵 筺 
革	After the flowers at the top （painted on the leather for decoration）、 we see the element for car with the middle stroke left out。 Think of the seats having been taken out so that they can be reupholstered with this decorated leather。 ［9］ 箆 箇 箋 箍 箏 箒 箔 箕 算 
靴	Leather 。 。 。 change。 ［13］ 
覇	Old West 。 。 。 leather 。 。 。 moon。 ［19］ 
声	The samurai at the top is familiar enough。 The combination beneath、 which looks like a flag with a line running through it、 is not。 Try to devise some way to take note of it、 and pay attention to the writing。 ［7］ 箘 箙 箚 箜 箝 
呉	The complex of strokes in this kanji is unusual and difficult、 because of the fourth stroke、 which is rare （see frames 33 and 34）。 The mouth and tool are already familiar。 ［7］ 箞 箟 管 
娯	Woman 。 。 。 give。 ［10］ 
誤	Words 。 。 。 give。 ［14］ 
蒸	The flower at the top and the  with the oven fire beneath are familiar。 The problem is what comes in between。 It is formed by the character for complete、 whose vertical stroke doubles up as the first stroke of water。 ［13］ 箪 箭 箱 箴 箸 
承	The sense of passive acceptance or reception of information is contained in this key word。 The form is based on the middle portion of the preceding character、 with three additional strokes、 best thought of as the kanji for three。 ［8］ 節 篁 範 篆 篇 築 篋 篌 
函	This is the character from which the element for shovel derives。 Within it comes the element for snare、 with the sparkler surrounding it。 ［8］ 篏 篝 篠 篤 篥 篦 篩 篭 
極	The poles this key word refers to are the extremities of the earth or the terminals of an electric field。 The elements are： tree 。 。 。 snare 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 crotch 。 。 。 。 ［12］  篳 篶 篷 簀 簇 簍 簑 簒 
牙	If you play with this primitive’s form with pencil and paper、 you will see that it begins with a box－like shape、 and ends with the final two strokes of the halberd、 a convenient combination for the tusk protruding from the mouth of an animal。 ［4］ 纈 纉 纊 續  Since this kanji has 4 strokes、 you would expect that as a primitive it would also have 4—but in fact it has 5 in the following two frames （the second stroke between divided into 2 strokes） and reverts to 4 again in frame 1907。 
芽	Flowers 。 。 。 tusk。 ［8］ 
邪	Tusk 。 。 。 city walls。 ［8］ 
雅	Tusk 。 。 。 an old turkey。 ［12］ 
釈	Animal tracks 。 。 。 shakuhachi。 ［11］ 
番	This key word has been chosen for its overlay of several meanings similar to those of the kanji： a turn of duty、 a round、 a number、 and so forth。 Its composite elements： animal tracks 。 。 。 rice field。 ［12］  As a primitive element、 we choose the image of a pair of dice which it is your turn to throw。 
審	The hearing referred to in this character relates to trials in the courts。 The elements： house 。 。 。 dice。 ［15］ 
翻	Dice 。 。 。 feathers。 ［18］ 
藩	Flowers 。 。 。 water 。 。 。 dice。 ［18］ 
毛	This character simply reverses the direction of the final stroke of hand to produce fur。 If you reverse your hand and put its palm down、 you will have the side on which fur grows。 ［4］ 簔 簗 簟 簡 
耗	Christmas tree 。 。 。 fur。 ［10］ 
尾	Flag 。 。 。 fur。 ［7］ 
宅	House 。 。 。 lock of hair。 ［6］ 
託	Words 。 。 。 lock of hair。 ［10］ 
為	This character rightly belongs to the previous lesson、 but we held it until now because of the final element、 the tail feathers。 After the drop at the outset、 the next three strokes are completely novel and should be given special attention。 ［9］ 簪 簫 簷 簸 粥 簽 
偽	Person 。 。 。 do。 ［11］ 
長	In line with the story of the preceding frame、 the hair that needs the hairpin is long。 ［8］ 耿 聆 聊 聒 聖 聘 聚 聞  The primitive of this kanji has two more shapes in addition to that of the kanji itself。Above its relative primitive、 it is abbreviated to the form 臭 and will mean hair。 Further abbreviated to 臧、 it will mean the long、 mangy mane of an animal。 
張	Bow 。 。 。 long。 ［11］ 
帳	Towel 。 。 。 long。 ［11］ 
脹	Flesh 。 。 。 long。 ［12］ 
髪	Hair 。 。 。 shape 。 。 。 friend。 ［14］ 
展	Flag 。 。 。 salad 。 。 。 hairpin。 ［10］ 
喪	Soil 。 。 。 two mouths 。 。 。 hairpin。 Hint： see spit （frame 151）。 The key word carries the wide range of meanings readily associated with it： error、 loss、 absence、 and so on。 ［12］ 駅 駆 駇 駈 駐 駑 
巣	Owl 。 。 。 fruit。 ［11］ 
単	Owl 。 。 。 brain 。 。 。 needle。 The sense is “not complex。” ［9］ 籌 籍 籏 籐 籔 籖 
戦	Simple 。 。 。 fiesta。 ［13］ 
禅	Altar 。 。 。 simple。 ［13］ 
弾	Bow 。 。 。 simple。 ［12］ 
桜	Tree 。 。 。 owl 。 。 。 woman。 ［10］ 
獣	Owl 。 。 。 rice field 。 。 。 one 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 chihuahua。 ［16］ 
脳	Part of the body 。 。 。 owl 。 。 。 villain。 By way of exception、 the kanji for brain has no connection with the primitive for brains。 ［11］ 
悩	State of mind 。 。 。 owl 。 。 。 villain。 ［10］ 
厳	Owl 。 。 。 cliff 。 。 。 daring。 ［17］ 
鎖	Metal 。 。 。 little 。 。 。 shells。 We have saved this character until now in order to draw attention to the visual diff erence between the owl and little。 By now your eyes should be so accustomed to these apparently infinitesimal diff erences that the point is obvious。 ［18］ 
挙	Owl 。 。 。 tool 。 。 。 hand。 ［10］ 
誉	Owl 。 。 。 tool 。 。 。 saying。 ［13］ 
猟	Pack of wild dogs 。 。 。 owl 。 。 。 wind 。 。 。 cornstalk。 ［11］ 
鳥	Dove 。 。 。 one 。 。 。 tail feathers。 This is、 of course、 the character from which we derived the primitive meaning of dove。 Note the lengthening of the second stroke。 ［11］ 籘 籟 籠 籤 籥 
鳴	Mouth 。 。 。 bird。 ［14］ 
鶴	Turkey house 。 。 。 bird。 The first element appears on only one other occasion、 back in frame 567。 ［21］ 
烏	The only thing that distinguishes this character from that for bird is the omission of the one stroke that makes it white。 Which is logical enough、 when you consider that there are no crows of that color。 ［10］ 
蔦	Flower 。 。 。 bird。 ［14］ 
鳩	Baseball 。 。 。 bird。 ［13］ 
鶏	Vulture 。 。 。 husband 。 。 。 bird。 ［19］ 
島	The bird’s tail is tucked under here、 because it has come to stop on a mountain to rest from its journey across the waters。 Thus the kanji comes to mean an island。 ［10］ 
暖	Unlike the connotation of warm weather learned for an earlier key word、 （frame 1452）、 this key word will be used to refer to the warmth of human congeniality。 Its elements are： sun 。 。 。 migrating ducks。 ［13］ 
媛	Woman 。 。 。 migrating ducks。 ［12］ 
援	Fingers 。 。 。 migrating ducks。 ［12］ 
緩	Thread 。 。 。 migrating ducks。 ［15］ 
属	Flag 。 。 。 gnats （see frame 524） 。 。 。 with a belt。 ［12］ 粁 粂 粃 粉 粋 
嘱	Mouth 。 。 。 belong。 ［15］ 
偶	The person on the left is familiar。 As for the right side、 we may combine the insect with a brain （observe the writing） and a belt to create the Talking Cricket who served as Pinocchio’s conscience。 （The belt is there because he pulls it off to give unrepentant little Pinocchio a bit of “strap” now and again。） ［11］ 粍 粐 粒 粕 粗 
遇	Talking Cricket 。 。 。 road。 ［12］ 
愚	Talking Cricket 。 。 。 heart。 ［13］ 
隅	Pinnacle 。 。 。 Talking Cricket。 ［12］ 
逆	Mountain goat 。 。 。 road。 ［9］ 
塑	This kanji depicts the art of modeling clay or wood into a figure of your choice。 The elements for composing it are： mountain goat 。 。 。 moon 。 。 。 soil。 ［13］ 
岡	Here we see a mountain goat “mounted” under a glass canopy。 In this and the following frames、 think of a particular Mount you know。 ［8］ 
鋼	Metal 。 。 。 Mount。 ［16］ 
綱	Thread 。 。 。 Mount。 ［14］ 
剛	Mount 。 。 。 saber。 ［10］ 
缶	Though the meaning has no reference to animals、 the parts do： horse with a mountain underneath。 ［6］ 
陶	Pinnacle 。 。 。 bound up 。 。 。 tin can。 ［11］ 
揺	Fingers 。 。 。 condor。 ［12］ 
謡	Words 。 。 。 condor。 ［16］ 
就	Capital 。 。 。 chihuahua with a human leg in place of one of its paws。 ［12］ 
懇	Skunk 。 。 。 silver 。 。 。 heart。 ［17］ 
墾	The groundbreaking referred to here is not for the erection of new buildings but for the opening of farmlands。 The elements： skunk 。 。 。 silver 。 。 。 soil。 ［16］ 
免	This character is used for excusing oneself for a failure of courtesy。 The elements are： bound up 。 。 。 sun （oddly enough、 laid on its side） 。 。 。 human legs。 ［8］ 粧 粨 粫 粭 粮 粱 粲 粳  For the primitive meaning、we shall refer to this character as a rabbit、 for which the old form of the character is 兔。 ［8］ 
逸	Rabbit 。 。 。 road。 ［11］ 
晩	Sun 。 。 。 rabbit。 ［12］ 
勉	Rabbit 。 。 。 muscle。 Notice how the last stroke of rabbit is stretched out to underlie the element for muscle。 ［10］ 
象	A rabbit’s head with the body of a sow represents an elephant。 Little wonder that the kanji also means “phenomenon”！ ［12］ 
像	Person 。 。 。 elephant。 ［14］ 
馬	Let the extra vertical stroke in the mane combine with the first vertical stroke to give an image of the horse’s long neck。 The only odd thing is the tail feathers at the end、 but that should present a good image to remember the character by。 The fact that the last stroke of mane and the first of tail feathers coincide should no longer surprise you。 ［10］  粹 粽 精 糀 糂 糅 糊 糎 糒 糖  As a primitive、 this kanji will mean a team of horses as distinct from the single horse whose primitive we met earlier。 
駒	Team of horses 。 。 。 phrase。 In American slang、 a pony is an underground translation of a classical text、 which students who cannot manage the difficult phrases of the original language consult and pass on from one generation to the next。 ［15］ 
験	Team of horses 。 。 。 awl。 ［18］ 
騎	Team of horses 。 。 。 strange。 ［18］ 
駐	Team of horses 。 。 。 candlestick。 ［15］ 
駆	Team of horses 。 。 。 ward。 ［14］ 
駅	Team of horses 。 。 。 shakuhachi。 ［14］ 
騒	Team of horses 。 。 。 crotch 。 。 。 insect。 ［18］ 
駄	Team of horses 。 。 。 plump。 ［14］ 
驚	Awe 。 。 。 team of horses。 ［22］ 
篤	Bamboo 。 。 。 team of horses。 ［16］ 
騰	Meat 。 。 。 quarter 。 。 。 team of horses。 ［20］ 
虎	The kanji in this frame recalls the famous Bengali fable about the group of magicians （the magic wand） who decided to make a tiger。 It seems that each of them knew how to make one part of the beast、 so they pooled their talents and brought all the pieces （diced into pieces） together、 at which point the fabricated tiger promptly ate its makers up （the bodiless human legs）。 Whatever the parable’s significance for modern civilization and its arsenals、 it should help with this kanji。 Oh yes、 we should not forget that cliff －like element。 Think of it as an abbreviation of the primitive for zoo （the first and fourth strokes、 actually）、 in order to fit the tiger somewhere into the picture。 In fact、 the abbreviation is perfectly logical、 since the bottom elements usurp the room for the rest of the primitive for zoo。 ［8］ 糘 糜 糞 糟 糠 糢 糧 糯  As a primitive element itself、 the human legs are also swallowed up、 but the meaning of tiger is kept、 and the whole serves as a roof for what comes beneath、 臨、 giving the tiger something else to eat。 
虜	Tiger 。 。 。 male。 ［13］ 
膚	Tiger 。 。 。 stomach。 ［15］ 
虚	Tigers 。 。 。 row。 ［11］ 
戯	Void 。 。 。 fiesta。 ［15］ 
虞	Tiger 。 。 。 give。 ［13］ 
慮	Tiger 。 。 。 think。 ［15］ 
劇	Tiger 。 。 。 sow 。 。 。 saber。 ［15］ 
虐	Tiger 。 。 。 box with a one in it （or a backwards broom、 if that makes it easier）。 ［9］ 
鹿	Drawn on the walls of a complex of caves near Niaux in southern France are a number of animal likenesses dating from the Upper Paleolithic period。 Among them we find pictures of deer、 some of them showing men in deer masks。 By comparing their drawings to real deer、 Stone Age people hoped to acquire power over the animal in the hunt； and by comparing themselves to the deer、 to take on that animal’s characteristics。 But time has locked with a “double－key” （the extra stroke through the element for key） the real secret of this art form from us、 and we can only surmise such meanings。 But more important than the enigmas of the troglodytic mind is the way in which caves、 a double－key、 and comparing gives us the kanji for deer。 ［11］ 糲 糴 糵 糶 糸 糺  As a primitive、 this kanji is abbreviated much the same as the tiger was： the lower element is dropped to leave room for a replacement： 自。 Its meaning、 however、 remains the same。 There are a very few cases （see frame 2002） in which there is no abbreviation。 When this happens、 we may keep the image suggested by the above explanation： painting of a deer。 
薦	Flowers 。 。 。 deer 。 。 。 one 。 。 。 tail feathers。 Note the doubling up in these last two elements as in frame 1941。 ［16］ 
慶	Deer 。 。 。 crown （note the doubling up） 。 。 。 heart 。 。 。 walking legs。 You may recall that we met the relative primitives at the bottom here before、 in the kanji for melancholy （frame 616）。 ［15］ 
麗	The painting of a deer itself with its form and color is enough to fill the bill for an image of something lovely。 But to give a bit of contrast、 we see two mediocre drawings from a later age on two patches of ceiling above。 Note that the drop in mediocre has been lengthened somewhat and the second stroke drawn down straight。 ［19］ 
熊	Elbow 。 。 。 meat 。 。 。 spoon atop spoon 。 。 。 oven fire。 ［14］ 
能	Try relating this kanji to that of the previous frame。 For instance、 you might imagine that the test of ability envisioned here is removing the bear from the oven fire。 ［10］ 
態	Ability 。 。 。 heart。 ［14］ 
寅	House 。 。 。 ceiling 。 。 。 sprout 。 。 。 animal legs。 Compare、 and do not confuse with、 the keyword in frame 1750。 ［11］ 
演	Water 。 。 。 sign of the tiger。 ［14］ 
辰	Cliff 。 。 。 two 。 。 。 hairpins。 ［7］ 
辱	Sign of the dragon 。 。 。 glue。 ［10］ 
震	Weather 。 。 。 sign of the dragon。 ［15］ 
振	Fingers 。 。 。 sign of the dragon。 ［10］ 
娠	Woman 。 。 。 sign of the dragon。 The key word is a synonym for pregnant、 whose character we met earlier （frame 507）。 Although the two kanji are oft en used together、 they should be kept distinct。 ［10］ 
唇	Sign of the dragon 。 。 。 mouth。 ［10］ 
農	Bend 。 。 。 sign of the dragon。 ［13］ 
濃	Among other things、 the key word refers to the thick consistency of liquids。 Its elements： water 。 。 。 agriculture。 ［16］ 
送	Road 。 。 。 golden calf。 ［9］ 
関	Gates 。 。 。 golden calf。 ［14］ 
咲	Mouth 。 。 。 golden calf。 ［9］ 
鬼	Drop of 。 。 。 brains 。 。 。 human legs 。 。 。 elbow。 ［10］ 
醜	Whiskey bottle 。 。 。 ghost。 ［17］ 
魂	Rising cloud of 。 。 。 ghosts。 ［14］ 
魔	Hemp 。 。 。 ghost。 ［21］ 
魅	Ghost 。 。 。 not yet。 ［15］ 
塊	Soil 。 。 。 ghost。 ［13］ 
襲	Vase 。 。 。meat 。 。 。 slingshot （doubled up with） snake 。 。 。 three 。 。 。 garment。 The top half of this character is the old form for the kanji in frame 536。 ［22］ 系 糾 紀 紂 約 紅 紆 紊 紋 
嚇	［17］ 
朕	［10］ 
雰	［12］ 
箇	［14］ 
錬	［16］ 
遵	［15］ 
罷	［15］ Secondly、 you may run into characters that you learned as primitives、 but whose meaning is completely unrelated to the primitive meaning we adopted。 In learning the meaning of the kanji、 be careful not to forget what it stands for when used as a primitive element。 
屯	［4］ 
且	［5］ In the third place、 you will meet kanji using combinations of elements that you can make into a new primitive with its own particular meaning。 Recall a previ－ ous kanji in which this combination appears and adjust your story to reinforce your new invention。 
藻	［19］ 
隷	［16］ 
癒	［18］ Finally、 there are shapes that were not covered in this book。 You are on your own here、 but it may help to consult a kanji dictionary to see whether any of the parts might not be a character with a specific and useful meaning。 The cluster of strokes forming 臼 in frame 2039 is a perfect illustration of this。 
丹	［4］ 
潟	［15］ Scattered here and there throughout the foregoing 55 lessons several figures of the Sino－Japanese zodiac were introduced。 We conclude this lesson、 and the book、 with the remaining figures。 In all、 there are twelve animals、 several of which take their writing from other characters quite unrelated in meaning。 So far、 then、 we have learned the following： rat （子）、 tiger （寅）、 dragon （辰）、 horse （午）、 ram （未）、 monkey （申）、 bird （酉）、 dog （戌）、 and hog （亥）。 This leaves three for the learning。 
丑	［4］ 納 紐 純 紕 
卯	［5］ 
巳	［3］
丨	This primitive element is a picture of just what it looks like： a cane or walking stick。 It carries with it the connotations of lameness and whatever else one associates with the use of a cane。 Rarely—but very rarely—it will be laid on its side。 Whenever this occurs、 it will always be driven through the middle of some other primitive element。 In this way、 you need not worry about confusing it with the primitive meanings of one。 ［1］ 促 
俄	 The meaning of this primitive is obvious from the first moment you look at it、 though just what it will be a drop of will diff er from case to case。 The important thing is not to think of it as something insignificant like a “drop in the bucket” but as something so important that it can change the whole picture—like a drop of arsenic in your mother－in－law’s coff ee。 ［1］ 俄 In general、 it is written from right to left 、 but there are times when it can be slanted left to right。 At other times it can be stretched out a bit。 （In cases where you have trouble remembering this、 it may help to think of it as an eyedropper dripping drops of something or other。） Examples will follow in this lesson。 
亀	Like the four that follow it、 this primitive is not a kanji in its own right、 though it is said to be derived from 八、 the character we learned earlier for eight。 It always comes at the bottom of the primitive to which it is related。 It can mean the legs of any kind of animal： from a grizzly bear’s paws to an octopus’s tentacles to the spindle shanks of a spider。 （The one animal not allowed is our friend homo sapiens、 whose legs figure in the next frame。） Even where the term “legs” will apply metaphorically to the legs of pieces of furniture、 it is best to keep the association with animal legs。 （You may review frame 6 here。） ［2］ 乾 亀 
聡	Notice how these human legs are somewhat shapelier and more highly evolved than those of the so－called “lower animals。” The one on the left 、 drawn first、 is straight； while the one on the right bends gracefully and ends with a hook。 Though they are not likely to suggest the legs of any human you know、 they do have something of the look of someone out for a stroll、 especially if you compare them to animal legs。 If you had any trouble with the kanji for the number four、 now would be the time to return to it （frame 4）。 ［2］ 乱 乳 
几	This primitive gets its name from the full kanji for the wind （frame 524）。 It is called an “enclosure” because other elements are oft en drawn in the middle of it、 though it can also be compressed together so that there is no room for anything in it。 The main thing to remember when writing this element is that the second stroke bends outwards、 like a gust of wind blown from above。 In addition to the basic meaning of wind、 we shall also have occasion to use the image of a weather vane。 The derivation is obvious。 ［2］ 僑 僕 
勹	Like wind、 the element meaning bound up is also an enclosure that can wrap itself around other elements or be compressed when there is nothing to enclose。 When this latter happens— usually because there is not enough room—and it is set on top、 the little hook at the end is dropped off 、 like this： 聴。 The sense of bound up is that of being “tied and gagged” or wrapped up tightly。 If you have trouble remembering when it serves as an enclosure （with the hook） and when not （without the hook）、 you might think of the former as a chain and the latter as a rope。 ［2］ 僖 僘 
僞	 This primitive element always appears at the top of the element to which it is related、 and is always attached、 or almost attached、 to the first horizontal line to come under it。 The horns can never simply be left hanging in the air。 When there is no line available、 an extra horizontal stroke （like a one） is added。 The final kanji of this lesson gives an example。 The meaning of this element is wide enough to embrace the horns of bulls、 rams、 billy goats、 and moose、 but not the family of musical instruments。 As with other elements with such “open” meanings、 it is best to settle on one that you find most vivid and stick with that image consistently。 ［2］ 僚 僞 
聲	 Although this primitive is not very common、 it is useful to know、 as the following examples will show。 Conveniently、 it is always drawn at the very bottom of any kanji in which it figures。 The first stroke、 the horizontal one、 is detached from anything above it、 but is necessary to distinguish tool from animal legs。 The sense of the element is a carpenter’s tool、 which comes from its pictographic representation of a small table with legs （make them animal legs if you need a more graphic image）、 so that any element lying on top of it will come to be viewed as a tool in the hands of a carpenter。 ［3］ 刕 列 初 
聳	This primitive has the look of ten、 except that the left stroke is bent down toward the left 。 It indicates where your hands （your ten fingers） fall when you let them droop： by your side。 The stroke order of this character can be reversed； but whichever stroke is written second、 that stroke should be drawn longer than the other。 The diff erence is slight、 and all but unnoticeable in printed characters、 but it should be learned all the same。 ［2］ 剖 剛 ･ 剥 剩 
聯	 To prepare for following frame、 we introduce here a somewhat rare primitive meaning wealth。 It takes its meaning from the common image of the overwealthy as also being overfed。 More specifically、 the kanji shows us one single mouth devouring all the harvest of the fields、 presumably while those who labor in them go hungry。 Think of the phrase exactly as it is written when you draw the character、 and the disposition of the elements is easy。 ［9］ 化 匚 匤 
厂	 This primitive means precisely what it looks like： a steep cliff。 You can almost see someone standing at the top looking down into the abyss below。 ［2］ 吋 同 
冂	 In addition to the basic meaning of hood、 this shape can be used for a glass canopy、 such as that used to serve “pheasant under glass。” Note its diff erence from the element for wind： the second stroke is hooked inwards here。 To help remember this detail、 think of the wind as blowing “out” and a glass canopy as keeping something “in。” Among the related images suggested by this primitive are： a monk’s cowl、 a riding hood、 a helmet、 and an automobile hood。 ［2］ 寰 寳 
宀	 This extremely useful primitive element depicts the roof of a house。 You can see the chimney at the top and the eaves on either side without much trouble。 It is a “crown” element、 which means that it is invariably set atop other things。 Examples follow immediately。 ［3］ 屁 居 屆 
艹	 We are not yet equipped with all the pieces necessary to learn the character for flower、 so shall have to content ourselves here with the first three strokes、 which represent the primitive of the same meaning。 Concentrate on the actual “bloom” of the flower、 and keep a particular flower in mind。 Try a rose、 a tulip、 or a daisy、 since none of them will have their own kanji。 Think about it well、 since once you have decided on your flower of choice、 you will be using it in a rather large number of stories later on。 ［3］ 志 忘 忙 
莫	 The element shown here should be taken to represent a modern graveyard。 Gone are the cobwebs and gnarled trees、 the tilted headstones and dark、 moonless nights that used to scare the wits out of our childhood imaginations。 Instead、 we see brightly colored flowers placed before the tombstones、 the sun shining gloriously overhead、 and a cuddly St。 Bernard sitting at the gate keeping watch。 ［10］ 悌 悖 悛 
抓	 The actual kanji on which this primitive meaning umbrella is based will not show up until frame 1026。 Think of it as a large and brightly－colored beach umbrella。 If you compare this with frame 8、 you will notice how the two strokes touch here、 while the kanji for eight would leave a gaping leak in the top。 ［2］ 抑 抒 
拊	 This compound primitive depicts a meeting as a massive gathering of people under one umbrella。 The full kanji from which this derives will be introduced later in frame 752。 The important thing here is to picture the scene just described and associate it with the word meeting。 ［3］ 拈 拉 拊 
夂	We call this element walking legs because it indicates “legs in motion、” whether you want to think of them as jogging or walking in long strides、 as the shape seems to suggest。 Be careful how you write it、 with the first two strokes like a stylized “7。” ［3］ 朕 朖 朗 
冖	 This pictograph of a simple crown is distinguished from the roof only by the absence of the chimney （the first drop at the top）。 It can be used for all the principal connotations of the word crown。 We will meet the full character from which this element is derived later on、 in frame 304。 ［2］ 柚 柝 
亠	The broad rim and tall top of the top hat is pictured graphically here in these two simple strokes。 At this point、 by the way、 you can revert back to frame 6。 If you have had any trouble with that character、 you now have the requisite elements to make a story： Six suggests the number of spider’s legs； just set a tall silk top hat on the crawling creature and you have your character。 ［2］ 栃 栂 
肛	A formal high silk top hat resting atop a weather vane represents a whirlwind。 To keep it distinct from the primitive for wind、 try to picture the vortex、 or tornado－like spinning movement、 of a whirlwind。 The next frame should help。 ［4］  栄 栓 栔 
馨	 Soil over the mouth of a container gives us a piece of clay pottery with its lid。 Behold the lidded crock。 ［6］ 棔 棕 
股	 Here we see a little red schoolhouse with the 3 dots on the roof。 As you write it in the following frames、 you should acquire a “feel” for the way the first two short strokes move left to right、 and the third one right to left 。 Write it twice now、 saying to yourself the first time as you write the first 3 strokes、 “In the schoolhouse we learn our a－b－cs、” and the second time、 “In the schoolhouse we learn our 1－2－3s。” ［5］ 梏 梓 梔 梗 梛 
聿	 This primitive element、 not itself a kanji、 is a pictograph of a writing brush。 Let the first 3 strokes represent the hairs at the tip of the brush、 and the following two strokes the thumb and forefinger that guide it when you write。 Note how the long vertical stroke、 cutting through everything、 is drawn last。 This is standard procedure when you have such a stroke running the length of a character。 However、 as we saw in the case of cow、 when this primitive appears on top of another primitive、 its “tail” is cut off 、 giving us 肢。 ［6］ 梨 梭 梯 械 梱 梳 
攵	 First find the long rod （the first stroke）、 held in the hand of someone seated （the next 3 strokes、 not unlike the pictograph for woman、 but quite diff erent from that for walking legs introduced in Lesson 13）。 The only thing left to do is conjure up the memory of some taskmaster （or taskmistress） from your past whom you will “never forget。” ［4］ 棠 棡 棣 棧 
弋	 Here we see a pictograph of a long and slightly warped arrow。 By extending the short final stroke in both directions、 you should see the arrowhead without any difficulty。 The hook at the bottom represents the feathers at the butt end。 When it serves as a semi－enclosure for other primitives、 the first stroke is drawn longer、 as we shall see in the following frames。 ［3］ 榴 榻 榾 
肥	 This primitive is easy to remember as depicting something used to bring all one’s arrows together into one handy place： the quiver。 ［4］ 槓 様 槙 槝 
戈	 The picture in this primitive is what we may call a “tassled arrow。” A decorative tassle is strung on the shaft of an arrow to indicate that it is no longer a weapon but a symbol of a fiesta。 As before、 the first stroke is extended when it serves as a semienclosure。 ［4］ 濡 濤 濫 濬 
肩	 I choose the word Thanksgiving as only one possible way of making this primitive more concrete。 The sense、 as its composite primitives make clear、 is of a “land fiesta、” or a harvest feast。 If you choose a word of your own、 make sure it does not conflict with fiesta。 ［6］ 樅 樊 樋 樌 樒 樓 
戊	 Note first the order of the writing。 The first stroke、 added to fiesta、 gives us a full－fledged enclosure、 because of which we should always think of this as a parade of something or other、 namely whatever is inside the enclosure。 ［5］ 樛 樞 樟 模 樢 
戌	 As distinct from the parade、 the march points to a formal demonstration、 whose emotions are generally a far cry from the happy spirit of the parade。 The inclusion of the one gives the sense of the singlemindedness and unity of the group joined in the march。 As was the case with parade、 the primitive inside the enclosure indicates who or what is marching。 ［6］ 橈 橋 橘 橙 機 橡 
肪	 The floats that are such an important part of a fiesta are shown here by the addition of the two extra horizontal strokes、 which you may take as a quasi－pictographic representation of the platform structure of a float。 ［6］ 櫛 櫞 櫟 櫢 櫤 櫨  the primitives tell us。 On the one hand、 we see the pessimistic wisdom that politics has to do with taskmastering、 maneuvering people with or without their will。 And on the other、 we see the campaign assurances that this duty can be performed correctly if only the right candidate is given a chance。 ［9］ 歔 歙 
肬	his primitive diff ers from the kanji for correct only by the movement added to the last two strokes、 the “－ing” of mending if you will。 But take a more concrete sense、 like mending holes in socks。 ［5］ 歛 歟 歡 止 正 
廴	he primitive meaning to stretch might at first seem similar to that for road。 Take a moment to study it more carefully and you will see the diff erence。 Like road、 this character holds other primitives above its sweeping final stroke。 ［3］ 殍 殕 殖 
疋	o avoid confusion with the other animals that will be showing up、 this primitive will signify a zoo。 Except for the downward hook at the end of the first stroke、 this element is indistinguishable from mending。 Perhaps by now you have developed a quick eye for such details。 If not now、 you will before long。 ［5］ 殱 殲 殳 殴 段 
巾	he basic meaning of this primitive is a bolt of cloth、 from which we derive the meaning of a towel。 ［3］ 汎 汏 
肭	he towel that has edges jagged like little crowns is the cook’s apron。 ［5］ 沈 沌 
冂	his primitive、 clearly derived from that for towel、 is always hung on another vertical stroke、 and takes the meaning of a belt。 ［2］ 沢 沫 
云	This primitive is meant to depict in graphic fashion a cloud of something rising upwards、 like vapor or smoke or dust。 ［4］ 法 泗 泙 泚 
冫	he condensation of the three drops we have been using to mean water into two drops signals the solidifying of water into ice。 Note that when this primitive appears to the left 、 it is written like the last two strokes of the element for water、 冫、 whereas under another primitive、 it is written like the first two strokes of the water primitive： 胚 。 ［2］ 洟 津 
喬	he sense of the primitive、 angel、 derives from the primitive for heavens replacing the top hat in the character for tall。 ［12］ 洶 洸 
啇	he primitive meaning antique、 not itself a kanji、 depicts a vase kept under a glass hood because it is very、 very old。 ［11］ 涙 涛 涜 
曷	onjure up the classic portrait of the Latin siesta： a muchacho sitting on the ground、 propped up against some building、 bound up from neck to ankles in a serape、 one of those great、 broad－rimmed mariachi hats pulled down over his face、 and the noonday sun beating down overhead。 Always use the complete image、 never simply the general sense of siesta。 ［8］ 淪 淫 淬 
育	he picture is obvious： the first stroke represents the head、 and the second the body of someone reclining。 You may also use the synonyms lying or lying down。 ［2］ 渤 渟 
肴	Either the idea of turning around and heading back during one’s travels、 or of folding an object in half will do。 The kanji depicts someone doubling back to the nearest inn to lie down and rest a weary pair of walking legs aft er a full day’s voyage。 ［9］ 渦 渧 温 
咅	he element for muzzle shows a vase fixed over a mouth、 perhaps with a rubber band running around the back of the head to keep it in place。 ［8］ 湾 湿 
竟	his primitive gets its meaning from the following frame。 It shows a pair of human legs and a tongue－wagging mouth looking at a mirror standing on the wall、 asking perhaps who might be the fairest of them all。 ［11］ 滑 滓 澁 
胄	he two horns on the head of the teenager are enough to suggest to most parents of adolescents a good image of a devil。 ［7］ 潘 潛 
壬	et the extended dot at the top represent the load that the samurai is carrying in his role as the master’s porter。 ［4］ 澵 澹 
也	his primitive is a pictograph of the scorpion、 the first 2 strokes representing its head and pincers、 the last stroke its barbed tail、 in which you may recognize the fishhook。 ［3］ 瀛 瀝 瀞 
豕	et this primitive represent a fat sow。 Easier than pulling it apart into smaller elements is remembering its shape as a highly stylized pictograph。 Practice its 7 strokes a few times before going on to examples of its use in the next six frames。 ［7］ 煉 煌 煎 煕 煖 煙 煜 
胛	his abbreviation of the full primitive for a sow、 quite naturally、 means piglets。 ［5］ 熕 熙 熟 熨 熬 
昜	This very helpful primitive element is worth the few moments it takes to learn it。 Just remember that each day you put a few pennies into the back of the little piglet on your bureau that you call a piggy bank。 ［9］ 熱 熹 
胞	his rather uncommon primitive is made by pulling the tail of the sheep to one side to create a semi－enclosure。 The meaning of wool is derived from the fact that the shearer is holding the sheep by the tail in order to trim its wool。 ［7］ 燾 燿 
隹	his primitive is best remembered as an old turkey、 complete with pipe and monocle。 Its writing is somewhat peculiar、 so take note of the order of the strokes。 Let the first four strokes stand for the turkey’s head、 neck、 and drooping chin。 The remainder can then be pictographic of the plumage。 ［8］ 爨 爪 爬 爭 爰 爲 爵 父 
胡	y combining the horse （giving a twist to its final stroke a bit to the left to keep the strokes from overlapping） with the turkey、 we get a flying horse or Pegasus。 Be sure not to confuse with the rarer element for turkey house （隺） that was introduced in frame 567。 ［11］ 犯 犱 
囗	This primitive depicts a corral or pen surrounding something、 which is thus pent in。 ［3］ 狷 狸 狹 
广	his primitive combines the cliff （the last 2 strokes） with the first dot we use on the roof of the house。 Together they make a “cliff house” or cave。 It “encloses” its relative primitives beneath it and to the right。 ［3］ 猫 献 猯 
扌	his alternate form of the primitive for hand we shall use to represent finger or fingers。 It always appears at the left 。 ［3］ 珪 班 珮 
胼	Let this primitive represent a union of two hands、 both of which are used at the same time。 Whenever this element appears at the bottom of its relative primitive、 the top line is omitted、 whether or not there is a horizontal line to replace it。 ［4］ 珵 珸 現 球 
脂	he picture of an arm dangling from the trunk of the body gives us the element for arm、 or tucked under the arm （relative to the element below it）。 Examples of both usages follow。 Unlike most primitives、 the kanji that bears the same meaning （frame  1418） has absolutely no connection with it。 ［2］ 琺 琿 
殳	lthough modern connotations are more suggestive、 this primitive simply refers to something thrown as a weapon。 Its elements： wind 。 。 。 crotch。 ［4］ 瑪 瑯 
圣	ere we see a simplified drawing of a spool （the element for earth at the bottom） with threads being wound about it tightly （the crotch at the top）。 You may remember it either pictographically or by way of the primitives。 ［5］ 璟 璢 
脆	he vulture and child combine to create the image of an aerie full of fledglings。 ［7］ 瓠 瓢 
脇	he claw and crown of the roof of a house （whose chimney is displaced by the claw） combine to give us a birdhouse。 ［6］ 瓣 瓦 
厶	his pictograph of an arm bent at the elbow is obvious。 ［2］ 瓰 瓱 
脈	he elbow hanging under a ceiling will become our element for a wall。 ［3］ 絛 絜 絞 
脳	his primitive can be seen as an abbreviation of the full primitive for child、 the second stroke dividing the head from the body much as it does in 子 and the other strokes condensing the long form so that it can be used atop its relative primitive。 We change the meaning to infant to facilitate keeping the full form and its abbreviation distinct。 ［4］ 甎 甑 
脹	s an abbreviation of the kanji for a valley、 this primitive gets its meaning as a small valley or gully。 ［5］ 甯 田 
脾	he combination of the element for little、 the basic “roof ” structure here （in which the chimney was overwritten、 as it was in the element for birdhouse）、 combined with the “window” （mouth） below、 gives this element its meaning of outhouse。 Although the window is not an essential part of an outhouse、 I think you will agree that its inclusion is a boon to the imagination、 greatly simplifying the learning of the characters in which it appears。 ［8］ 由 甲 申 
歹	his character is meant to be a pictograph of a bone attached to a piece of flesh （or vice versa。） The first stroke serves to keep it distinct from the character for evening （frame 109）。 ［4］ 畉 畊 畋 界 
舛	hese two elements are actually the full form whose abbreviation we learned as the character for measuring box in frame  42。 To the left 、 we see the familiar shape of evening、 and to the right a completely new shape。 The meaning we have assigned、 sunglasses、 is entirely arbitrary。 ［7］ 畍 畏 畑 畔 瑩 留 畚 
曼	un 。 。 。 eye 。 。 。 crotch。 ［11］ 畛 畜 畝 
禾	his primitive element will be made to stand for wheat。 It connotes a special grain、 more expensive than ordinary rice and so reserved for special occasions。 Alternatively、 it can mean cereal。 Its form is like that for tree、 except for the dot at the top to represent a spike of wheat blowing in the wind。 ［5］ 疣 疥 疫 疱 疲 
从	 The duplication of the kanji for person gives us this primitive for assembly line。 Perhaps you can imagine clones of your chosen person rolling off an assembly line in a factory。 ［4］ 
腆	Take this as a pictograph of a plow。 ［2］ 瑤 纖 
并	hink of this element as a picture puzzle in which the pieces interlock。 Its elements： horns 。 。 。 two hands。 ［6］ 痼 痾 痿 瘁 
腋	he element on the left looks like rice with a belt running through it、 but we would do best to think of it in terms of its writing order： little 。 。 。 belt 。 。 。 little。 On the right、 of course、 the taskmaster。 ［12］ 瘉瘋瘍瘟 
腎	ere we have a unique enclosure made up of two elements： compass and reclining。 Think of the banner as a standard for rallying around； then imagine a crowd reclining before a compass （presumably to give them a “direction” in life）。 ［6］ 瘢 瘤 
尸	he pictographic representation of this element is obvious。 Provided you can hold your imagination in check for the first example、 you might best imagine your own national flag in composing your stories。 ［3］ 瘧 瘰 瘴  While this kanji has obvious affinities to the“seed” group、 it also happens to be the zodiacal sign of the monkey （the one who speaketh no evil、 among other things）。 We shall therefore take monkey as its primitive meaning。 
乍	he saw in this primitive is distinguished from the primitive for ax by the extra “teeth” on the blade。 ［5］ 癢 癧 癨 癩 癪 
腑	 single vertical stroke transforms broom into a rake。 When an element comes below the rake、 the vertical stroke is shortened、 as we have seen before with other similar primitives such as sheep and cow。 Moreover、 when something comes above the rake and joins to it at the top、 the vertical stroke begins at the top horizontal stroke、 as in the following two frames。 ［4］ 癬 癰 癲 
腔	 rake and the grains of rice at the bottom give us a hint of winnowing、 which relates clearly to the meaning of a sieve。 ［8］ 癶 癸 
尹	he only thing distinguishing a mop from a rake is the bent handle that does not cut through the top horizontal stroke。 It depicts the swish－swash motion of a mop。 ［4］ 緩 緬 緯 緲 
而	he pictograph of a comb is clearly visible in this primitive element。 ［6］ 発 登 發 白 百 皀 
凵	his enclosure—which embraces its relative primitive from the bottom—is a pictograph of the scoop of a shovel。 When room permits、 the arms are extended upwards to nearly the same height as the relative element it holds。 ［2］ 皂 皃 
腕	he element for flowers joins with the long horizontal stroke beneath it to create the picture of a bowl of salad。 ［4］ 
腟	he primitive for caverns diff ers from that for cave by the presence of the primitive for twenty、 suggesting a maze of underground caves。 ［7］ 
卉	he three needles stacked up give us a haystack （in which it may be harder to find the hay than the needles）。 In the rare case in which there is nothing underneath this element、 as in the following frame、 the last three strokes are written virtually the same as two hands—that is、 the second stroke sweeps down slightly to the left 。 ［5］ 皓 皖 皙 
尭	The two human legs added to the haystack （with the horizontal stroke to keep the two parts distinct from one another and avoid an ugly tangle） give us a straw man。 ［8］ 羅 羆 羇 
腥	his character simply splits the vertical stroke of a half in half once again、 to get a quarter。 In so doing、 it spreads the split stroke out to form a sort of enclosure under which its main relative primitive will be placed。 It can be used either in its substantive or verbal meaning。 ［6］ 皚 皛 皜 
腦	his weapon、 which has the appearance of the long saber but is drawn slightly diff erently、 depicts a spear。 It appears very rarely—in fact、 only twice and both instances are given in the following frames。 ［2］ 
丂	he simple snare composed of a piece of vine and a bent twig is depicted here as a sort of abbreviation of the bow、 to which it is related。 ［2］ 盒 盖 
腫	he slingshot diff ers from the snare by virtue of the first stroke、 which you may take as the strip of rubber you pull back on、 to make the slingshot sling。 ［2］ 盒 盞 
腮	his primitive is based on that for husband。 The two extra strokes represent a pair of scissors he is carrying around。 ［6］ 盻 盾 省 眄 
腰	o remember with this primitive meaning、 you might picture a tuxedo－clad maestro waving his baton about wildly。 The baton is、 of course、 the little drop at the top。 And the two boxes attached to the long vertical stroke may represent his tuxedo tails、 if you wish。 ［6］ 眇 眈 眉 看 県 眛 
咼	he meaning of this primitive is taken from the combination of “the joint” above and the mouth in the cowl below。 ［9］ 縅 縉 縊 縋 縒 縛 縞 
阝	his key word has been chosen because of its connotation of “the highest point、” thereby suggesting the image of the highest point in a village、 that is、 a hill or mountain on which sacred or festive events take place。 If you have a clear image of the Athenian acropolis、 you might use it to express this element for a pinnacle。 Note that this primitive appears only on the left 。 On the right、 as we shall see later、 the same form takes a diff erent meaning。 ［3］ 眼 着 睆 
腱	This primitive simply discards the first stroke of that for hole to become a paper punch。 When found at the top of its relative primitive、 it undergoes the same change、 the eight becoming human legs （see frame 1316）。 ［4］ 
幺	he two triangular shapes here and their final stroke are intended as a pictograph of a cocoon、 spun in circles and tied up at the end。 It is like the character for thread、 except that the silkworm’s actual product has not yet emerged clearly at the bottom。 ［3］ 縟 縡 縢 
卩	his character is a kind of pictograph of a stamp that may best be imagined as a postage stamp to distinguish it from other stamp－like things to come up later。 ［2］ 睾 睿 
腹	The chop－seal is the engraved piece of wood or stone used in the Orient to certify documents。 Unlike the stamp、 the top stroke here reaches a good distance to the left of its vertical stroke。 When it appears at the top of another primitive、 it is abbreviated to 脩。 ［2］ 瞋 瞎 
腴	he primitive for fingerprint is like that for stamp except that the second stroke bends back towards the right、 like an arm。 ［2］ 瞑 瞞 
腸	vening 。 。 。 fingerprint。 ［5］ 
腺	his primitive element is actually the mirror－image of that for stamp、 but since Japanese does not permit a stroke to go to the left and bottom in one swoop、 the visual similarity is not perfectly clear。 If you play with the idea with pen and paper、 its logic will become obvious。 ［3］ 瞠 瞥 瞬 
腿	his primitive represents a number of small staples、 like the kind commonly used in an office and at school。 ［4］ 瞭 瞰 瞳 瞶  （about one－third full）。 You might also think of the Spanish “porrón、” a decanter shaped like a long－necked bird。 
膀	he element for drum shows a samurai over a table。 The top stroke of the table appears to be missing、 but actually it has doubled up with the final stroke of the element for samurai。 ［9］ 
艮	e give this element the meaning of silver from the kanji in the following frame。 Both the original pictographic representation and the primitive elements that make it up are more trouble to hunt out than they are worth。 It is best simply to learn it as is。 In doing so、 take careful note of the stroke order、 and also the fact that when this element appears on the left 、 the penultimate stroke is omitted、 giving us simply 臙。 ［6］ 短 矮 矯 石 矼 砂 
兂	f you draw this character once、 you will see that its first three strokes resemble the form for receipt （except that the second stroke ends more parallel to the first）、 with its last stroke stretched to form the first of the two human legs。 From this we give it its meaning of a waitress （who should not be confused with the waiter back in frame 976）。 ［4］ 研 砕 砠 砡 
膳	hese two strokes are a crude drawing of a bundle of stalks bound together into a sheaf。 ［2］ 砺 砿 
屯	rop of 。 。 。 shovel 。 。 。 fishhook。 ［4］ 硝 硤 硫 硬 
辟	ne way American children learn to cope with food they are forced to eat against their will is to smother it with ketchup。 We can see this depicted in the mouth with the flag over it （in this case、 the Stars and Stripes）、 set alongside the element for spicy （all of which is not far removed from the original meaning it had as a character on its own： “false”）。 ［13］ 縺 縻 總 
膵	onsidering the lack of circular lines、 this kanji is not a bad pictograph of a cornucopia。 Despite the appearance of the printed form、 what looks like the first two strokes are actually written as one。 ［2］ 硯 硲 
圥	As we mentioned back in frame 234、 rice seedlings get an element all their own： soil and human legs becomes an ideograph of the spikelets of rice bunched together for implanting in the muddy soil of the paddy。 ［5］ 
膈	his tree has become a pole （that is、 a tree with its branches not touching） because most of its branches have been pruned off by a naive but greedy gardener anxious to siphon off its resin （the drop at the top、 written as the final stroke） as quickly as possible。 ［5］ 罸 罹 羂 羃 
膏	his primitive looks very close to that for salad、 except that an extra horizontal line has been included、 reminiscent I should think of the long celery sticks in your salad。 ［5］ 罨 罩 罪 罫 
膊	This unusual looking grass skirt is composed of a top hat and scarf、 and eight celery sticks。 ［13］ 置 罰 署 罵 
膸	As the plant grows up it sprouts leaves and a stalk、 which are depicted here over a single horizontal stroke for the soil。 Think of something （its relative primitive） growing up in a flash to many times its normal size、 much like little Alice in Wonderland、 who grew up so fast she was soon larger than the room in which she was sitting。 ［4］ 碌 碍 碎 碑  the hog”）。 The elements we have to work with are： pinnacle 。 。 。 walking legs 。 。 。 cell。 ［11］ 
丰	hatever image you contrived for the character meaning hedge （frame 154）、 choose something diff erent and clearly distinguishable for this primitive for bushes。 The element itself diff ers from that for grow up only in the extension of the single vertical stroke beneath the final horizontal stroke and in the order of writing。 Though we shall meet only one instance of it in this chapter and one more later on、 it is worth noting that when this element appears on the side、 the final stroke is sloped somewhat to the left ： 膺。 ［4］ 績 繁 
耒	The addition of the final two strokes to the element for bushes gives the sense of a tree that is also a bush。 Hence、 the Christmas tree。 ［6］ 碚 碣 
臂	he element for bushes has an extra stroke added （drawn from the point where the second and fifth strokes touch when it “encloses” something beneath、 otherwise from the point where the fourth and fifth strokes intersect） to give the image of the crutches Japanese gardeners use to hold up a tree that is being bent into shape。 From there it is but a short leap to the small bonsai plants that imitate this art in miniature。 ［5］ 紿 終 絃 組 絅 
膽	he element for bushes extended the vertical stroke beneath the final horizontal stroke； the cornstalk omits that final stroke altogether、 leaving only the stalk and the leaves bursting forth on all sides。 ［3］ 碓 碕 碗 
膤	he flower、 the mouth、 and the element for grow up combine here to create the primitive for cabbage。 ［10］ 碧 碨 碪 碫 碬 碮 
膨	y twisting the final two strokes of our cabbage into a pair of legs、 we get a scarecrow with a cabbage for a head。 ［10］ 碯 碱 碲 碳 碴 確 
膜	he drawing of this element is difficult to do smoothly、 and should be practiced carefully。 It is a pictograph of all sorts of plants and grasses thrown together to make silage。 The vertical stroke is drawn here with a broken line to indicate that it will always double up with another primitive element’s vertical stroke。 ［6］ 碼 碾 磁 磅 磆 磊 
膾	his element gets its name and meaning from its pictographic representation of a key。 The shape should be familiar： it is none other than the third and fourth strokes of the kanji for five。 ［2］ 繃 繆 
臈	his element depicts a large、 sharpened key coming down on the head of a criminal St。 Bernard。 ［4］ 繊 繋 繍 
韋	he vertical stroke added here （the third stroke） turns the primitive element for a key into a locket。 Below that、 we find a square container （the mouth） and sunglasses with one of the lenses popped out。 Note that in the primitive element for locket the final vertical stroke of sunglasses reaches all the way through to touch the mouth。 ［10］ 礦 礪 礫 
于	ote how this element diff ers from dry in virtue of the small hook at the end of the third stroke。 ［3］ 祟 祠 祢  Since the phrase“too much” is overly abstract、 we shall take the image of a scale whose indicator spins round and round on the dial because too much weight has been set on it。 It will help to use this image in learning the kanji itself。 
膩	e include this element here because of its visible similarity to the element for bundle。 Be sure to make a distinct image out of its composite ingredients： meeting 。 。 。 mouth 。 。 。 person。 The stroke order follows the order of the elements exactly、 but note how the person runs through the mouth。 ［8］ 繖 繙 繚 繝 
疒	he enclosure shown in this frame is composed of a cave with ice outside of it。 It is used for a number of kanji related to sickness。 If you want to picture a caveman nursing a hangover with an ice－pack、 that should provide enough help to remember the shape of this element and its meaning。 ［5］ 禅 禊 禍 
匚	his enclosure、 open at the right、 represents a box lying on its side。 When it is not used as an enclosure、 its form is cramped to look like this： 臣。 You may distinguish its meaning by picturing it then as a very small box。 ［2］ 禎 福 
癶	he dots at the top of this tent are the wooden poles protruding outside the canvas walls of a teepee。 ［5］ 禝 禦 禧 禪 禮 
尞	The St。 Bernard dog and its overlapping with the element for teepee are enough to suggest the meaning of this primitive element： a pup tent。 The combination of sun and little at the bottom can be seen as a little opening or flap through which the sun shines in the morning to let you know it’s time for getting up。 ［12］ 
彡	he three simple strokes of this element actually represent the form or shape of the hair of one’s beard。 But we keep the simple sense of a shape、 or its verb “to shape、” in order to avoid confusion later when we meet an element for hair。 When using this element、 be sure to visualize yourself shaping the thing in question、 or better still、 twisting it out of shape。 ［3］ 
脉	his element means just what it looks like： two fenceposts。 They enclose whatever comes between them、 as distinct from a pair of walking sticks （see frame 250）。 ［2］ 
膿	s the pictograph itself immediately suggests、 this element depicts spreading out or scattering from a focal point。 To cap－ ture this meaning、 we choose the image of a sparkler。 It will oft en have another primitive put at its center point。 ［4］ 科 秒 秕 秘 
巴	his element is shaped roughly like the snake、 but pay attention to the diff erence when writing it。 ［4］ 秦 秧 秩 秬 
其	As the two legs at the bottom suggest、 this bushel basket is a large container、 standing on the 。 Its first four strokes indicate that it is made of wicker、 much like the small wicker basket introduced just above。 To make room for something inside of the bushel basket、 the legs at the bottom are attached to the final horizontal stroke and extended to make an enclosure。 ［8］ 稍 税 稏 稐 稑 稒 稔 
膕	y adding a single stroke at the bottom of the kanji for in、 we get a sort of pictograph of a purse。 ［5］ 
且	he pictographic representation in the primitive shown here is a small stand with horizontal shelves。 Thus we give it the general meaning of a shelf。 It diff ers from the kanji and primitive for an eye only in its final stroke、 which extends beyond the two vertical strokes at both ends。 Think of it as a shelf for special keepsakes or a glass bureau for knickknacks、 keeping it distinct from the kanji we learned in frame 202。 ［5］ 
冓	elery 。 。 。 again。 ［10］ 穡 穢 穣 穩 穫 
臀	lass canopy 。 。 。 flower。 It is most rare to see the flower come under its relative element。 Note how it is straightened out to fill the space available。 ［5］ 穰 穴 究 穹 空 
氐	Family name 。 。 。 。 ［5］ 
甫	This primitive refers to all sorts of identification tags、 but dog tag is chosen for its descriptiveness。 On the top we see the arrowhead、 joined to the screwdriver below by the lengthened vertical stroke。 ［7］ 窟 窩 窪 窮 窯 
阝	city walls On the left 、 and rather more pressed in its form、 this element meant the high spot of a village、 or its pinnacle。 On the right side、 in the form shown here、 it means the lowest part of the city、 around which its walls rise up as a protection against invaders。 Hence we nickname this element： city walls。 ［3］ 
臉	lthough not a pictograph in the strict sense、 this primitive depicts one stroke pulling another along behind it。 Note how it diff ers from cliff and person because of this dragging eff ect、 not to mention the fact that the first stroke is written right to left 、 almost as if it were a long drop。 When this element comes under a diff erent element、 the strokes are drawn apart like this： 船。 ［2］ 窰 窶 
膂	This element、 which looks something like a backwards hook、 we will call a clothes hanger。 Used as an enclosure、 it begins further to the left 。 ［1］ 
釆	Having already met the primitive for human footprints、 we now introduce the one for animal tracks。 Its elements are simply： a drop of 。 。 。 rice。 ［7］ 
乇	 This element is clearly derived from that for fur。 By leaving out the second stroke、 we get simply a lock of hair。 ［3］ 
膚	So as not to confuse this primitive element with the character for feathers、 think of the extravagant tail－feather plumage of the peacock。 The form itself is too pictographic to need breaking down further。 ［5］ 簣 簧 
膠	ere we have a quasi－pictograph of the colorful and decorated clips used to bind up long hair。 Note its similarity to the scarf、 which diff ers only by the addition of one stroke。 ［4］ 簾 簿 籀 籃 
膝	e have met these three strokes before。 When they come under another stroke、 they represent a claw、 and thence a vulture。 And when placed atop a roof structure、 they create a schoolhouse。 The owl has something to do with both： it is a bird of prey、 and it has come to be associated with learning。 ［3］ 
膰	This primitive is simplicity itself。 It depicts bird claws that are joined to one another。 Note the extra horizontal stroke in friendship、 which gives the appearance of a “two” in the middle of the kanji、 further emphasizing the togetherness of the migrat ing ducks。 ［9］ 籬 米 籵 籾 
屰	The animal horns and mountain unite、 quite naturally、 to give us a mountain goat。 The extension of the final stroke indicates its tail、 which only shows up when it has something under it。 In an overhead enclosure、 it is to be pictured as standing still、 so that its tail droops down and out of sight。 ［6］ 粘 粛 粞 
舖	ulture 。 。 。 king 。 。 。 mountain。 By now you should be used to finding two elements double up on a stroke、 as is the case here with king and mountain。 ［9］ 粡 粢 粤 
豸	his primitive represents a skunk by combining the claw with the first part of the element for a sow。 Note how the final stroke of claw is turned and lengthened to double up with the first stroke of the sow。 ［7］ 纛 纜 缶 缸 缺 罅 罇 
臆	The story is told of the people of the Exodus that、 disstisfied with Moses’ leadership、 they colleted their gold ornaments and melted them down to fashion a golden calf for an idol。 The animal horns and heavens here represent that god of theirs。 ［6］ 